
===PDF PAGE 1===
Accepted: 29 November 2024 / Published online: 21 December 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
  Julian Zubek
j.zubek@uw.edu.pl
1 Human Interactivity and Language Lab, Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, Stawki 
5/7, 00-183 Warsaw, Poland
2 Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a 
conceptual review and a guide for avoiding local minima
Julian Zubek1 · Tomasz Korbak2 · Joanna Rączaszek-Leonardi1
Artificial Intelligence Review (2025) 58:65
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-024-11048-y
Abstract
Computational simulations are a popular method for testing hypotheses about the emer -
gence of symbolic communication. This kind of research is performed in a variety of 
traditions including language evolution, developmental psychology, cognitive science, 
artificial intelligence, and robotics. The motivations for the models are different, but 
the operationalisations and methods used are often similar. We identify the assumptions 
and explanatory targets of the most representative models and summarise the known 
results. We claim that some of the assumptions—such as portraying meaning in terms of 
mapping, focusing on the descriptive function of communication, and modelling signals 
with amodal tokens—may hinder the success of modelling. Relaxing these assumptions 
and foregrounding the interactions of embodied and situated agents allows one to sys -
tematise the multiplicity of pressures under which symbolic systems evolve. In line with 
this perspective, we sketch the road towards modelling the emergence of meaningful 
symbolic communication, where symbols are simultaneously grounded in action and 
perception and form an abstract system.
Keywords Emergent communication · Signalling games · Symbol grounding · 
Compositionality · Computational simulations · Linguistics · Ecological psychology
1 3

===PDF PAGE 2===
J. Zubek et al.
1 Introduction
Symbolic nature is commonly thought to demarcate human communication from commu -
nication in most other species (Deacon 1997; Beecher 2021).1 Human languages exhibit 
unparalleled flexibility and constitute the basis for other symbolic systems crucial for mod-
ern human cognition (e.g. formal systems such as mathematical notation). Thus, the prob -
lem of the emergence of symbolic communication systems with formal properties from 
continuous interactions in a continuous (analog) world is central to theories of cognition. 
Over the last three decades, this problem has been tackled using computational models, 
which has made the theories more internally coherent and more comparable and classifiable. 
Most communication emergence models involve simulated agents that exchange messages 
over a communication channel while acting in some environment (Ohmer and Cuskley 
2023). These agents are typically rewarded for successfully achieving specific goals related 
to communication, leading to the development of efficient communication protocols.
In the present paper, we offer a critical review of agent-based communication emergence 
models relevant to the symbol emergence problem. The overall logic of the paper is as 
follows: we recognise that models are grounded in different domains of inquiry—from phi-
losophy to linguistics to robotics—and motivated by questions pertinent to those domains 
(Sect. 2). We subsequently describe several concrete models representative of the multitude 
of works that have appeared over the last three decades (Sect. 3). The scope of what is being 
modelled ranges from highly abstract models rooted in evolutionary game theory to embod-
ied simulations with agents navigating complex environments. We evaluate the models in 
terms of their merits and shortcomings, which helps us to pinpoint their underlying common 
assumptions about the communication process and to identify those that hinder progress 
towards modelling the emergence of structured and contextually-flexible symbolic systems 
(Sect. 4). We identify three such assumptions: 
1. Taking the existence of discrete symbols for granted.
2. Assuming that the referring or world-descriptive function is the main function of 
communication.
3. Adopting the mapping metaphor as the relation between symbolic forms and their 
meanings.As we claim in this paper, the communication emergence field is in a local 
minimum created by this particular set of assumptions underlying extant modelling 
efforts. We argue that certain properties of the communication process are currently 
taken for granted, while crucial aspects of language remain unexplored. The paper’s 
main claim is that progress does not hinge on complexifying agents’ internal archi -
tectures for computational efficiency, enriching tasks or environments, nor creatively 
composing models. Instead, to escape the local minimum, we must closely examine 
and potentially suspend the three core assumptions. We propose relaxing these assump-
tions while recognising multiple sources of communication complexity arising from 
individual, social, cultural, and evolutionary pressures (Sect. 5). Only by combining 
1 There are arguments that animals such as domestic dogs (Olney 2013) or chimpanzees (Cissewski and 
Luncz 2021) may learn to understand and use symbolic references to some extent. Deacon ( 1997) believes 
that it is possible with a special training procedure, but in principle does not occur in animal communica -
tion systems found in nature. At the same time, he recognises that animal communication is continuous with 
human communication with respect to other types of signs (icons and indices).
1 3
65 Page 2 of 40

===PDF PAGE 3===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
these sources can we avoid a local minimum stemming from a one-dimensional treat -
ment of communication as an optimisation process with a single goal. We demonstrate 
that suspending the aforementioned assumptions and recognising the emergent nature 
of signals and symbols within coordinative dynamics facilitates identifying sources of 
complexity of linguistic structures, the interactions of these sources, and their relative 
contributions to symbol emergence. These postulates are realised by a certain strain of 
embodied simulations (Sect. 6). By opening this possibility, we hope to establish novel 
explanatory targets for models and new avenues for research on emergent symbolic 
communication.
Before we proceed, we will discuss some historical influences that have shaped current 
communication emergence models. The first influence concerns the notion of symbol itself 
and its evolution over time. As Deacon ( 2011b) observed, historically the term “symbol” 
was applied almost exclusively to language utterances, inscriptions, graphical markings, 
etc., created specifically to represent something. The overarching idea was that symbols are 
created culturally according to some convention. Congruently, in Peircean semiotics, sym -
bols are a particular class of signs (along with icons and indices) whose meanings are deter-
mined by referring to a general law (Peirce 1903). The law has to be applicable to a wider 
class of signs, not just to single instances (symbols are general), and the person interpreting 
a symbolic sign has to assume that the originator of the sign adheres to this law (symbols 
are conventional).2 For example, a specific word belongs to a grammatical category (a gen-
eral class), and we presume that a user of this word comprehends grammatical conventions 
rather than simply reproducing memorised phrases. This is the notion of symbol we have in 
mind when we write about symbol emergence in this paper. However, throughout the 20th 
century, emphasis shifted, and the concepts of generality and conventionality of symbols 
became somewhat conflated. The distinguishing feature of symbols became the arbitrari -
ness of the connection between symbol and its referent (Deacon 2011b). Then, in some 
technical disciplines, symbols began to be narrowly understood as discrete tokens that can 
be manipulated formally and constitute parts of a code—a mapping between symbols from 
two distinct domains. As we will argue later, existing models of emergent communication 
use the term “symbol” in various ways but demonstrate a tendency to slip into this last, 
technical understanding. This tendency is discussed extensively by Taniguchi et al. (2019), 
consistently with our views.
The second influence on communication emergence modelling is the view of communi-
cation imposed by the influential work of Shannon in the mid-20th century and strengthened 
by the facilitation of computational modelling that such a perspective carries. Most models 
portray communication as a method of conveying messages from an information source 
to a destination via signals transmitted over a communication channel (Shannon 1948). 
In Shannon’s words, “The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing 
at one point either exactly or approximately a message selected at another point” (ibid., p. 
378). This highlights the problem of message transmission as central to communication. For 
a long time, the “meanings” of messages were not emphasised and were usually simplified 
as a mapping between symbols and objects in the agent environment, which realises the 
2 Peircean categories are notoriously abstract and challenging to interpret, compounded by Peirce’s develop-
ment of these concepts over multiple decades across various manuscripts. Consequently, multiple interpreta-
tions of Peirce’s semiotics exist; for context, see Liszka et al. (2006).
1 3
Page 3 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 4===
J. Zubek et al.
“grounding” of symbols (congruent with the narrow, technical notion of symbol that we 
describe above) (Harnad 1990). The idea of a message-object mapping, which represents 
meaning, mirrors the idea of a message-signal mapping central to information theory (where 
a “signal” is an element of the code used for transmission and a “message” is what is trans-
mitted with the code).
However, the fathers of information theory were convinced that the term “communica -
tion” should have a broader meaning. As Weaver (1949) put it, “The word communication 
will be used here in a very broad sense to include all of the procedures by which one mind 
may affect another” (ibid., p. 10). Weaver’s definition resonates with pragmatic accounts 
of meaning that focus on influencing agent actions rather than representing the world. In 
human communication, we often use existing conventions to effectively influence another 
person. For example, I can signal a person to come closer or stay away using conventional 
gestures. Conventions are central to the broader notion of symbol present in semiotics. We 
find a formal treatment of conventions in Lewis’ signalling game (from now on the LSG; 
Lewis (1969))–the third historical source of assumptions concerning the communication 
process.
Based on game theory, Lewis demonstrated that a conventional communication protocol 
emerges as an equilibrium when two agents—sender and receiver—are rewarded for suc -
cessful coordination; it is rational for the two agents to stick to the convention, even if the 
convention itself is arbitrary. This was Lewis’ solution to the problem of meaning creation 
by convention. The LSG can be formally defined as a game between a sender s : I→M , 
who sends a message m ∈M  upon observing an input i ∈I , and a receiver r : M→A , 
who takes an action a ∈A  upon receiving a message m ∈M . A payoff is given to both the 
sender and the receiver depending on the sender’s input and the receiver’s action.
Notably, in the original formulation of the LSG, information-theoretical tools were not 
used, and Shannon’s communication theory was not cited as a reference. Later, the two 
approaches were integrated by Skyrms ( 2010), who subsumed the LSG into the general 
information-theoretical schema for communication. He interpreted signals as probabilistic 
events that carry quantifiable information and simultaneously perform coordinative func -
tion. However, this reinterpretation undermine some of the pragmatic inclinations of Lewis’ 
original work. Skyrms noted that in many situations the LSG can be discussed equivalently 
in terms of information flow and coordination, but he preferred the first perspective, which 
reversed Lewis’ original emphasis.3 This made it easy to once more conflate signalling with 
information transmission and to see the LSG as part of the meaning-mapping enterprise.
The resulting framework, realised by many computational models, can be illustrated by 
the example used by Wittgenstein (Wittgenstein 1953; Correia 2020), where a builder uses 
building stones of various shapes and asks his assistant to pass a stone of a particular shape. 
These kinds of structured interactions are simulated with artificial agents, whose behaviour 
is governed by internal adaptive mechanisms (for example, weight updates in neural net -
works). At first, agents choose from their predetermined sets of behaviours and signals at 
random. Each episode of the game has consequences for the agents (for instance, passing a 
right or wrong stone), which determines their reward, and, in turn, makes them update both 
their behavioural and signalling predispositions. In this way, signals become conventions in 
3 In Lewis (1969), the word “information” appears 11 times, and the word “coordination” appears 138 times; 
in Skyrms ( 2010), the word “information” appears 358 times, and the word “coordination” appears seven 
times.
1 3
65 Page 4 of 40

===PDF PAGE 5===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Lewis’ sense, resulting in the individual coupling of signals to agents’ behaviours (policies) 
and the sharing of this coupling among agents. This adaptation process is thus a coevolution 
within a population rather than a simple optimisation of individual fitness. Computational 
simulations demonstrate how such iterative adaptation can lead to the emergence of stable 
communication systems.
Existing work on emergent communication has repeatedly demonstrated the possibility 
of a conventionalised mapping from a set of discrete signals to a set of objects emerg -
ing without any central authority. Optimal mapping can be learnt in various settings and 
with different agent architectures and adaptation mechanisms (Spike et al. 2017). However, 
natural languages, owing to their richness and expressiveness, do not resemble simple bidi-
rectional mappings. They include parts of speech that are not easily mapped to objects or 
events, they involve complex syntax and grammar, they exploit ubiquitous nuances and 
ambiguities, they allow speculative conversations on abstract entities, and they crucially 
depend on interaction in time. These properties are visible in everyday verbal interactions, 
which are full of ambiguity and often involve repair sequences (imagine asking the clerk 
at a store for a certain object and receiving a puzzled look followed by a clarification ques-
tion) (Dingemanse et al. 2015).
Much work is still needed to build an adequate account of these phenomena within the 
field of language emergence modelling. This is not to say that efforts are not being made to 
develop the field and understand the complexity of the problem of the emergence of sym -
bolic communication—for reviews see Hutchins and Johnson ( 2009); Lazaridou and Bar -
oni (2020); Lipowska and Lipowski (2022); Ohmer and Cuskley (2023); Brandizzi (2023); 
Galke and Raviv ( 2024); Boldt and Mortensen ( 2024); Peters et al. ( 2024). The present 
review differs from the previous work that aimed to summarise modelling efforts in that it 
strives to identify and examine the very foundations of the assumed phenomenon of sym -
bolic communication, which most works seem to take for granted. Previous reviews were 
very helpful in identifying the missing sources of symbolic structure, which were revealed 
by gradually including aspects of developmental and interactive contexts of communica -
tion, such as learning bottlenecks, task structuring, kinds of collaboration, and the richness 
and complexity of the perceptual information. Nevertheless, the overall “skeletal dynamics” 
of the models remain similar (Ohmer and Cuskley 2023) and, as we claim above, rooted in 
the information-theoretic interpretation of signalling games.
One of the most conceptually advanced early reviews of the models of communication 
emergence was presented by Hutchins and Johnson (2009). They rightly point out that mod-
els rarely address the heart of the problem, because they are explicitly seeking a mapping 
between predefined symbols and predefined meanings (“references”). Only some models 
allow for the emergence of meanings in interactions (e.g. Steels and Belpaeme 2005) and 
only a small proportion of these seek to show the true emergence, which requires that both 
the meanings and the signalling systems emerge in interactions from scratch (Marocco and 
Nolfi 2007; Hazlehurst and Hutchins 1998; Lieck and Rohrmeier 2021).
Hutchins and Johnson advocate the latter approach and show that the problem of signal 
emergence involves the problem of distinguishing signalling behaviours from the ongoing 
flow of interaction. They illustrate this with an analysis of signal emergence in chimpan -
zees interaction, where infants begin to reenact frozen fragments of movement trajectories 
that appeared in previous interactions as communicative “gestures.” The authors observe a 
“remove between forms and meaning” as these gestures diverge from the original trajecto-
1 3
Page 5 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 6===
J. Zubek et al.
ries. They outline various dimensions of this divergence, and suggest how these distinctions 
could be implemented in computational models of communication emergence. However, 
the relation of mapping itself (between the forms and meanings) is not questioned even in 
this very deep conceptual analysis.
Remaining in the aforementioned local minimum, which involves a mapping metaphor, 
hinders efforts to scale up from simple games to structured communication systems utilised 
by agents for flexibly coordinating dynamic interactions within their environments. Review-
ing existing models leads us to the critical claim that a deep rethinking of foundational 
assumptions is necessary. It also leads to a constructive claim that recent developments in 
cognitive science, linguistics, and linguistic anthropology, which emphasise the primacy 
of action and co-action for the theory of cognition and language (Di Paolo et al. 2018), 
foreground interaction (Dingemanse et al. 2023) and coordinative dynamics (Tognoli et al. 
2020), allow for a reformulation of the communication process itself. These developments 
also provide opportunities for scaling up. They enable communication to be grounded anew 
in biological information processes (Pattee 1969, 1982; Deacon 2011a; Rączaszek-Leonardi 
and Kelso 2008) and symbolic communication to be viewed as interaction-dominant and 
pragmatics-oriented (Kempson et al. 2000; Rączaszek-Leonardi 2016; Gregoromichelaki 
and Kempson 2019). Making this shift of perspective could help overcome the prevalent 
tendency to perceive communication as relying on mapping between amodal signs 4 and 
bound meanings, primarily geared towards world description.
2 Modelling traditions and explanatory targets
Computational models of the emergence of communication come from various research tra-
ditions, reflecting their theoretical goals, definitions, and methods (e.g. Hutchins and John-
son 2009; Lazaridou and Baroni 2020; Lipowska and Lipowski 2022; Ohmer and Cuskley 
2023; Galke and Raviv 2024). No single publication can do justice to their recent prolif -
eration. We roughly group them by discipline to draw the reader’s attention to different 
explanatory roles assigned to simulations. These arise from differences in the perspectives 
on language in general and the place, role, and nature of language within human cognition 
and behaviour. We selected models from various disciplines to showcase the diversity of 
explanatory targets across research areas. The (admittedly simplified) picture in Fig. 1 illus-
trates some of the commitments and explanatory targets of the models in different scientific 
disciplines (the division of the domains is an idealisation). As illustrated, some explanatory 
targets are shared by multiple disciplines.
Philosophical reflection on the nature of language and its relation to thought is prob -
ably as old as philosophy itself (Seuren 1998). The goal of naturalising truth and meaning 
is to show how these concepts can be understood as natural phenomena without resort -
ing to metaphysics that allow immaterial ideas to exist separately from physical reality. 
In this context, game-theoretic models have been used in research on social conventions, 
normativity, and semantic information,5 starting with the influential work of Lewis (1969). 
4 We use the term “amodal” in this paper to mean “devoid of form.” Amodal signs lack physical or perceptual 
properties.
5 We use the term “semantic information” to distinguish between information with semantic meaning and, 
for instance, purely correlational information as a quantity in information theory. See Floridi ( 2010) for a 
1 3
65 Page 6 of 40

===PDF PAGE 7===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
He formalised the notion of convention, which arises in the interaction of agents. In his 
formalism, the sender has to communicate the state of the world to the receiver by emitting 
discrete signals, upon which the receiver produces a reaction. If the receiver’s reaction is 
adequate given the state of the world, this is beneficial for both agents. Mutual benefit make 
the agents stick to the established convention of linking signals with states of the world, 
even if those links are arbitrary.
Lewis’ original motivation was to provide a game-theoretic explication of the notion 
of truth by convention (solving Quine’s (1936) problem). His ideas influenced many other 
authors, who subsequently studied this formalism using computer simulations. The simplest 
implementation of the LSG consists of disembodied agents passing discrete tokens. No 
structured signals or environmental constraints are simulated. The goal is not to faithfully 
portray actual communication processes but rather to support certain philosophical positions 
by demonstrating the theoretical possibility of the bottom-up emergence of conventions. In 
recent years, this thread has been developed to account for more complex communication 
processes (Skyrms 2010; Barrett and Skyrms 2017; Barrett et al. 2019; Korbak et al. 2021; 
Ohmer and Cuskley 2023).
discussion of this term.
Fig. 1 Different scientific disciplines and the roles they assign to emergent communication models
 
1 3
Page 7 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 8===
J. Zubek et al.
In linguistics, computational models of language emergence are used to ask various 
questions. Explaining the structure of natural languages  means a) describing the regulari -
ties or “rules” that natural languages follow and b) explaining how these regularities emerge 
in the process of language evolution. Unlike biological evolution, language as such (before 
writing) leaves no “fossils”, so the communicative systems of early humans (or hominids) 
are difficult to uncover. Therefore, agent-based simulations became attractive tools for test-
ing hypotheses about the origins of language and possible evolutionary trajectories, both 
on biological and cultural time scales (Smith et al. 2003). The goals are theoretical: models 
concern various aspects of language, such as the evolution of lexemes and systematic varia-
tion of syntax or vocabulary (Nowak and Krakauer (1999); for a review, see, e.g., Ferri et al. 
(2018); Grifoni et al. ( 2016)). Compared to the philosophical tradition, simulations devel -
oped within evolutionary linguistics tend to be more focused on language structure. The 
simulation results are (often) compared with the empirical data to assess their plausibility 
as models of language evolution and change (Brighton et al. 2005a, b; Parisi et al. 2008; De 
Boer and Zuidema 2010).
Cognitive psychologists are also interested in studying cognitive processes underlying 
language use (language learning, understanding and production). They ask questions about 
what cognitive capabilities are required to effectively learn and use language and how lan -
guage influences other cognitive processes, such as memory, categorisation, and reasoning. 
These questions can be answered with the help of computational models of language emer-
gence or language learning that elucidate in detail the cognitive structures of an individual 
agent.
For example, Elman (1993) explored the relation between language learning and memory 
capacity, showing that a simple recurrent neural network successfully learns the structure 
of complex sentences only if it starts with a limited memory and only gradually “matures” 
to its full capabilities. A prominent group of models explored the structure of perceptual 
categories of an individual as shaped by a communication system emerging within a popula-
tion (Steels and Belpaeme 2005; Baronchelli et al. 2015; Steels 2015). Then, the interest in 
cognitive science shifted from purely individualistic processes to more interactive phenom-
ena (Deacon 1997; Brighton et al. 2005a, b; Rączaszek-Leonardi 2009). As a result, some 
models explored interactive factors within social environments or various demographic 
characteristics, such as population size and social structure, on language evolution (V ogt 
2009; Dale and Lupyan 2012; Zubek et al. 2017).
Another problem studied by cognitive psychology is seeking the sources, reasons, and 
mechanisms of discretisation, that is, perceiving continuous spaces through discrete cat -
egories. We view this as a subproblem of categorical perception. In the context of com -
munication emergence, discretisation can occur in both the domains of forms (signals used 
for communication) and meanings (concepts being communicated). At the level of forms, 
the self-organisation of the vowel system under communicative pressures was proposed 
by Lindblom et al. ( 1984) and de Boer ( 2001), while Oudeyer ( 2005) modelled the emer -
gence of discrete vocalisations. At the level of semantics, a conceptual model was proposed 
by Gärdenfors, where discrete concepts were represented as convex regions in continuous 
conceptual spaces (Gärdenfors 2004). Feldman ( 2012) discussed the circumstances under 
which such representations are viable. A principled abstract model of form discretisation in 
a form-meaning mapping within communication was presented by Lieck and Rohrmeier 
(2021). In this model, forms and meanings originated in different spaces, and simulations 
1 3
65 Page 8 of 40

===PDF PAGE 9===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
showed several conditions that may lead to form discretisation in signal transmission sce -
narios. Similar processes were also explored by Geffen Lan et al. ( 2020). Such discretisa-
tion processes can be seen as part of the problem of symbolic emergence, where forms are 
perceived as different instances of the same token and distinct from other tokens. Taniguchi 
et al. (2023) proposed that the simultaneous alignment of discrete categories and negotiation 
of their names in a population of agents can be treated as a single probabilistic generative 
model, making it a case of distributed Bayesian inference. This is an argument for viewing 
the emergence of discrete categories in communication systems as a collective-level phe -
nomenon rather than an individualistic cognitive process (Taniguchi 2024).
Emergent communication models have also experienced a recent surge in interest in the 
machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) community. Initial goals of the AI pro -
gramme included replicating the cognitive processes necessary to develop human-level 
intelligence and use natural language the way humans do. Nowadays the field has more 
pragmatic orientation, and focuses on developing artificial agents capable of flexible and 
goal-directed language use. Recently, there has been a lot of progress in natural language 
processing (NLP) using semi-supervised models using large quantities of existing data 
(such as large language models). There are concerns that language learned in this way is not 
properly grounded and does not integrate well with agent’s actions in the world (Mordatch 
and Abbeel 2018). Chat-based large language models fine-tuned using human feedback and 
reinforcement learning provide some pragmatic grounding; there are also some works that 
attempt to use multi-modal corpora of text aligned with images to visually ground language 
understanding (e.g. Peng et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023). Harnad (2024) discusses conceptual 
limitations of these approaches, as they still attempt to ground the language “top-down” 
starting from huge volumes of data instead of agent’s sensorimotor experience.
In contrast to data-driven NLP models, emergent communication models involve simu -
lated agents engaging in interactions in order to evolve their own communication protocols 
in a bottom-up manner. Much research has attempted to replicate the basic structure of natu-
ral languages, often targeting language compositionality. Studying compositionality aligns 
with the goal of studying cognitive processes underlying language use , although the AI 
community, in comparison to cognitive psychology community, puts a greater emphasis on 
the practical results of the simulations rather than their theoretical underpinnings. Lazaridou 
et al. ( 2018) demonstrated that agents trained with reinforcement learning can solve the 
LSG in which input is given as raw pixel images, not symbolic tokens. Emerged protocols 
have displayed some degree of a systematic structure, but they were not perfectly compo -
sitional. Moreover, these protocols were quite fragile, as small changes in input stimuli or 
vocabulary size led to different organisation of the communication. Several other studies 
focused on the circumstances under which a more structured language appears (Mordatch 
and Abbeel 2018; Andreas 2019; Chaabouni et al. 2020).
Some other models originating in the AI community are even more directly motivated 
by natural language processing and understanding . The work of Kottur et al. ( 2017) on 
emergent dialogue is to some extent motivated by the work on visually-grounded conversa-
tional systems (Mostafazadeh et al. 2017). The formulation of the problem in Lazaridou et 
al. (2017) is motivated by image captioning (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2017). Lee et al. (2018) 
proposed using the LSG as a blueprint to train a system translating between two natural 
languages without parallel corpora and instead using visual input to ground meanings. 
The potential applications of emergent communication research in building explainable AI 
1 3
Page 9 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 10===
J. Zubek et al.
(Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017) are another active area of research. The idea is to translate a 
communication protocol emerging between agents into a natural language such as English. 
For visually grounded approaches, this can be done using labelled images by relying on 
visual semantics determined by the class hierarchy of the images (Lazaridou et al. 2017). 
Another approach is to align English utterances in an emergent communication protocol 
with respect to the effects they exert on a trained receiver (Lazaridou et al. 2020).
The trend of making simulations more realistic and embodied has been taken even further 
in artificial life and cognitive robotics communities. In this tradition, agents are autonomous 
mobile robots (usually simulated in silico to some extent). This means their interactions 
with the environment are usually much richer than in other traditions. These interactions are 
given central focus and communication emergence is treated as another layer of the intricate 
web of interactions. The goal is to achieve functional communication in an environment, and 
this environment should ultimately be an actual physical environment, not just a simulation.
To some degree, this goal could be achieved by teaching agents a preexisting language, 
but many researchers are also interested in how an efficient language specifically tailored 
to a given environment can evolve on its own. In such models, agents’ communication is 
intertwined with the rest of their activities, often involving exploring the environment and 
searching for food or other agents (Floreano et al. 2007; Grouchy et al. 2016; Schulz et al. 
2012). Stress is placed primarily on the robustness of emerging communication protocols 
and minimal starting assumptions, as communication should scale up to realistic environ -
ments. Some works in this tradition have aimed to explain basic aspects of animal commu-
nication in different evolutionary scenarios (Floreano et al. 2007; Mitri et al. 2009), while 
others have targeted phenomena characteristic of human languages, such as its productivity, 
presence of grammatical structures, and the focal role of dialogue (Grouchy et al. 2016; 
Schulz et al. 2012).
In contrast to other domains, signals appearing in robotics models are often modulated 
by multiple factors and are not fully controlled by agents. For example, in Floreano et al. 
(2007), communication was realised through light signals whose colours were regulated by 
the sender and properties that depended on the physics of the environment (e.g. directional-
ity, the possibility of being obscured by obstacles). This level of complexity emerging from 
non-trivial embodiment sets this tradition apart from purely computational AI modelling, 
which typically relies on simpler simulated environments with fewer degrees of freedom 
(we will discuss the role of embodiment in more detail later in this paper).
In conclusion, each discipline that includes communication in its area of interest has 
explanatory targets that depend on its general nature and goals. Models are designed to 
address various aspects of communication and language emergence, sometimes using dif -
ferent techniques. AI is the domain in which we see the greatest proliferation of models and 
in which most novel techniques appear and the domain where research is often motivated 
by concrete engineering problems and not the theory of language per se. Novel modelling 
techniques are applied across domains; however, they are already tinted by the specific 
assumptions adopted within the AI community. For instance, computer science treats sym-
bols just as any discrete elements that can be subject to formal manipulations, and this view 
is often—implicitly or explicitly—adopted in communication emergence models.
Meanwhile, recent advances in the respective fields that are interested in the theory of 
language emergence (developmental linguistics, language evolution, and enactivism) have 
seeped into computational models rather slowly. Consequently, designed models often rely 
1 3
65 Page 10 of 40

===PDF PAGE 11===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
on a simplified treatment of basic problems, which are the core of more theoretically rich 
approaches. Moreover, modelling results cannot be easily incorporated into constructed 
theories. One example is the way the term “compositionality” is often treated in the com -
munication emergence literature, which diverges from the original notion present in the 
philosophy of language (Rorot and Rączaszek-Leonardi 2023). Here, cognitive science, 
integrating multiple disciplines from linguistics to psychology to anthropology to computer 
science, could well serve as a bridge between the domains. Importantly, with its recent “eco-
logical turn” toward action-oriented and situated cognition, cognitive science may integrate 
processes on biological, developmental, and dialogical time-scales (Rączaszek-Leonardi 
2003; Christiansen and Chater 2022).
We align ourselves with the positions of such ecological cognitive science. From this 
perspective, we point out how the lack of flow of ideas between domains might slow down 
the progress of computational modelling as a significant aid for the theoretical models of 
communication and language emergence. In the following, we describe concrete examples 
of models which best illustrate the various theoretical goals. We will show their advantages 
and contributions. However, we will also indicate that some of the simplifications they make 
concern the basic assumptions about the process of communication and are incompatible 
with theories of language that put greater emphasis on interactions within the environment.
3 From Lewis’ signalling game to embodied simulations
Despite having different areas of focus, all of the above domains use agent-based models to 
simulate communication emergence. As a blueprint for the analysis of all kinds of model -
ling efforts, we adopt the LSG. It provides a minimal interactive communicative setting and 
delimits a broad class of models, capturing the essential elements of the problem of conven-
tion—or signal-based social coordination. It is recognised and sometimes explicitly built 
upon across various disciplines, from philosophy and anthropology to psychology, biology, 
economics, and so on. Choosing a common blueprint further facilitates the comparison of 
the models on a conceptual level in terms of modifications to this basic scheme for various 
reasons, which can be evaluated as welcome or unwelcome from a theoretical point of view. 
Showing their basic compatibility with the LSG should also reveal that they share limita -
tions inherent in the blueprint itself if such limitations are present.
The LSG consists of two agents, a sender and a receiver, a set of states of nature (stimuli), 
a set of signals, and a set of responses. A sender observes a state of nature, sends a signal to 
the receiver, and the receiver chooses a response. There is a unique correct response given 
the state of nature unknown to the receiver. If the receiver chooses the correct response, 
both the sender and the receiver are rewarded. In the course of learning (or evolution), the 
agents converge to a Nash equilibrium, which could be either a perfect solution when the 
communication is unambiguous and the receiver always chooses the correct response or a 
partial pooling equilibrium when different objects are signalled with one signal. The perfect 
solution occurs when the agents have agreed upon an unambiguous mapping from states 
of nature to signals and from signals to responses. Lewis called such solutions signalling 
systems.
The original interpretation of the LSG involved rational agents maximising their reward. 
Skyrms (2010) later reinterpreted it in terms of evolutionary game theory: he demonstrated 
1 3
Page 11 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 12===
J. Zubek et al.
that signalling systems may emerge through simple replicator dynamics (which may repre-
sent both biological and cultural evolution). He proposed that the information present in the 
signalling system is sufficient to provide a general account of semantic meaning. According 
to Skyrms, meaning emerges in the symmetry breaking of converging to one signalling 
system (out of several possible systems).6 Each signal can be assigned a descriptive mean -
ing (when an external observer estimates the probability of the sender perceiving a certain 
stimulus given the signal) and indicative meaning (when an external observer estimates 
the probability of the receiver performing a certain action given the signal). Such meaning 
is a property of the overall signalling system and does not presuppose that the sender and 
receiver are rational agents introducing any kind of meaning of their own.
Several other problems in philosophy and social science can be formalised in terms of 
LSGs. For example, the labour market can be modelled in terms of employees (senders) 
who signal their ability to employers (receivers) through educational credentials (signals) 
(Spence 1973). Similarly, voter ignorance and the spread of misinformation can be mod -
elled in terms of people (senders) maintaining or spreading false beliefs (signals) to signal 
their group identities or political affiliations (Funkhouser 2017).
Barrett and Skyrms (2017) considered generalised LSGs consisting of multiple subgames 
organised through a self-assembly. As a simple example, they give alarm calls emitted by 
animals. At first, a particular alarm call is emitted in the presence of a specific predator. Then, 
upon hearing an alarm call, an individual might learn to repeat the same call to warn others 
even without spotting the predator. Barrett and Skyrms discuss two mechanisms involved 
in the self-assembly process. First is called template transfer, which involves using adapta-
tions that emerged in the context of one game in another game. Template transfer assumes 
the historicity of the evolution or learning process giving rise to signalling systems—previ -
ous adaptations pave the way for the new ones. The second mechanism is modular com -
position, which is based on recursively nested games, in which a simpler game becomes a 
part of a more complex one. The two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, and usually 
work together. A variety of social, cognitive, and semiotic phenomena can be understood 
in terms of generalised signalling games, including logical inference (Barrett and Skyrms 
2017; LaCroix 2022), information integration in a network of agents (Barrett et al. 2019), 
functional specialisation, and communication structuring (Barrett et al. 2018).
3.1 Beyond Lewis’ signalling game
Most of the recent models of emergent communication can be seen as extensions of the LSG 
concerning particular elements: stimuli, signals, responses, or reward/learning mechanisms 
(which all necessitate changes in agent architecture). Below, we review various models, 
from the simplest extensions to complex embodied models, which significantly diverge 
from the original structure of the LSG. We do not intend to provide a comprehensive review. 
Our choice of models is dictated by their popularity and their relevance to the problem of the 
emergence of symbolic communication.
In our overview, we discuss how these models aim to explain different sources of com -
munication complexity connected to a) the internal structure of signals, b) the structure of 
the environment, c) the structure of actions in the environment and types of control intro -
6 Here, “symmetry breaking” means that initially, all possible solutions are equiprobable, but once a slight 
tendency appears to favour one signal over the other the system starts evolving towards a particular solution.
1 3
65 Page 12 of 40

===PDF PAGE 13===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
duced by signals, and d) the structure of rewards. The selected models and their properties 
are presented in Table 1. In the next sections, we discuss them in detail starting from rela -
tively simple formal models and moving towards embodied simulations in realistic environ-
ments. Throughout, we refer to the LSG as a blueprint and demonstrate how the presented 
models deviate from its structure (as reflected by section titles).
3.2 Compound signals and noise
The first step in studying interesting phenomena related to natural language evolution is to 
extend the LSG by adopting compound signals consisting of multiple tokens. A good exam-
ple is the influential work by Nowak and Krakauer (1999), who studied the dynamics of the 
evolution of mono- and polysyllabic words and two-word expressions. They investigated 
whether compound expressions would be evolutionarily preferred to simple words using 
evolutionary game theory. They constructed a fitness function related to communicative 
success and identified language structures that optimise this function. The function included 
factors such as perceptual noise in the signal space (risk of confusing similar syllables) and 
uneven payoffs for successfully communicating different concepts (for example, signals 
warning against dangers of different magnitudes). The authors demonstrated that smaller 
and partially ambiguous lexicons are optimal under certain circumstances. This result might 
explain why the vocabulary size in natural languages does not grow ad infinitum but stabi -
lises at a certain optimal size.
They further studied compound expressions formed according to rudimentary “gram -
mar”, which restricted the space of valid utterances. These compound expressions allowed 
the agents to exceed the previous vocabulary limits without a negative impact on commu -
nicative success. All simulations were kept at an abstract level. The authors demonstrated 
what sorts of languages are optimal but did not simulate the emergence of actual communi-
cation properties. Their work is a valuable demonstration of the role of noise and the com -
plex structure of tasks that lead to uneven rewards in shaping the language structure. These 
factors align well with our ecological perspective and inspired subsequent work (Kuciński 
et al. 2021).
3.3 Compositional signals via vertical transmission
The interaction between sender and receiver in the standard LSG is horizontal in that, ini -
tially, neither the sender nor the receiver knows any meaningful signals and the conven -
tion emerges between them. In terms of language evolution, this may represent emerging 
conventions between peers, but not cultural language transmission from one generation to 
another. In order to target this phenomenon, Kirby ( 2001) developed an iterated learning 
model, which inspired a large body of research over the years (Kirby et al. 2014).
In the iterated learning model, a student (receiver) observes a set of stimulus-signal 
mappings generated by a teacher (sender) from the previous generation. Signals are com -
pound multisyllabic utterances, and stimuli are objects described by the composition of 
stable properties. The produced stimulus-signal pairs become a learning sample for the 
next sender, which produces a learning sample for yet another sender, and so on. When the 
student is unable to learn all stimulus-signal pairs from the previous generation perfectly, 
vertical transfer introduces a bottleneck shaping the structure of language. Iterated learning 
1 3
Page 13 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 14===
J. Zubek et al.
Model Discipline Environ-
ment 
(stimuli)
Signals Available 
actions
Rewards 
and learning 
mechanism
Results/
explanatory 
target
Lewis 
(1969)
Philosophy Discrete 
tokens
Discrete tokens Discrete tokens A spe-
cific response 
rewarded
Stabi-
lisation 
of social 
conventions
Nowak 
and 
Krakau-
er 
(1999)
Linguistics Discrete 
tokens
Sets of tokens 
(compound ex-
pressions), risk 
of confusion
Discrete tokens Different re-
wards are given 
depending on 
the response
Evolution-
ary origins 
of phono-
logical and 
gram-
matical 
structures
Smith 
et al. 
(2003)
Linguistics Binary vec-
tors: com-
binations of 
properties
Sets of tokens 
(compound 
expressions)
– Learning 
mapping after 
the previous 
generation in 
a supervised 
manner
Origins of 
systematic 
structure
Batali 
(1998)
Linguistics Binary vec-
tors: simple 
predicates
Sequences 
of tokens 
(compound 
expressions)
Binary vectors: 
reconstructed 
predicates
The sender 
tries to predict 
the receiver’s 
responses 
internally 
(obverter). The 
receiver learns 
from the sender 
in a super-
vised manner. 
Roles change 
periodically.
Emer-
gence of 
systematic 
structure in 
sequences 
of variable 
length
Jaques 
et al. 
(2019)
Artificial 
intelligence
2D grid 
world with 
simple 
objects 
encoded 
as binary 
vectors
Discrete tokens Movement in 
the environment
The number of 
collected food 
items is re-
warded, group 
reward
Emergence 
of com-
munica-
tion under 
intrinsic 
social 
influence 
motivation
Steels 
and Bel-
paeme 
(2005)
Cognitive 
psychology
Sets of 
numerical 
vectors 
represent-
ing colours 
(available 
to the 
sender and 
receiver), 
marked 
stimulus 
(avail-
able to the 
sender)
Discrete tokens 
from an infinite 
set
Choosing the 
correct stimulus
Specific re-
sponse reward-
ed, supervised 
learning of new 
word forms
Emerging 
commu-
nication 
stabilising 
category 
formation
Table 1 Models of emergent communication discussed in the paper, their origin in various traditions, and 
their characteristics in terms of the basic template of the LSG. The models were selected to display various 
interaction scenarios considered as communicative situations in the model. We ordered them according to 
their abstractness from idealised formal models to embodied simulations/mobile robots
1 3
65 Page 14 of 40

===PDF PAGE 15===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Model Discipline Environ-
ment 
(stimuli)
Signals Available 
actions
Rewards 
and learning 
mechanism
Results/
explanatory 
target
Laz-
aridou 
et al. 
(2017)
Artificial 
intelligence
Sets of 
numerical 
vectors: 
raw RGB 
images
Sets of tokens 
(compound 
expressions)
Choosing the 
correct stimulus
Specific 
response is 
rewarded
The signal-
ling system 
is grounded 
in raw vi-
sual input
Can-
gelosi 
(1999, 
2001)
Linguistics & 
philosophy
2D grid 
world with 
objects 
encoded as 
binary vec-
tors (avail-
able to 
sender and 
receiver; 
the receiver 
gets per-
ceptual 
noise)
Sets of tokens 
(compound 
expressions)
Discrete 
movement 
in a grid-like 
environment 
and discrete 
response tokens
Locating food 
and avoiding 
poison are 
rewarded in 
evolution, the 
speaker is not 
rewarded
Symbolic 
mode of 
reference - 
transfer of 
symbol-
symbol 
relations 
to new 
vocabularies
Schulz 
et al. 
(2012)
Robotics 2D realistic 
environ-
ment, own 
position 
in the en-
vironment 
(available 
to the 
sender 
and the 
receiver)
Sets of tokens 
(compound 
expressions)
Continuous 
movement in 
the environ-
ment (available 
to sender and 
receiver)
Meeting at 
the appointed 
location is 
rewarded
Construct-
ing abstract 
location 
concepts 
grounded 
in spatial 
experience
Loula 
et al. 
(2010)
Linguistics & 
philosophy
2D grid 
world, 0–1 
presence 
of nearby 
objects of 
various 
classes 
(avail-
able to all 
agents)
Discrete tokens 
from a large set
Choice of 
high-level, 
predefined 
behaviour: 
wandering, 
fleeing, etc. 
(available to all 
agents)
Hebbian learn-
ing of associa-
tions (classical 
conditioning)
Shift 
between 
different 
forms of 
signification 
within an 
ecological 
niche
Mor-
datch 
and 
Abbeel 
(2018)
Artificial 
intelligence
2D envi-
ronment, 
(shared by 
the sender 
and the 
receiver), 
marked tar-
get object 
and action 
(available 
to sender)
Sets of tokens 
(compound 
expressions)
Continuous 
movement in 
the environment
Explicit error 
feedback
System-
atic signal 
structure is 
grounded 
in action 
structure
Table 1 (continued) 
1 3
Page 15 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 16===
J. Zubek et al.
model was mathematically analysed using evolutionary game theory (Brighton 2002) and 
implemented in computational simulations. Iterated learning intends to explain the system-
atic structure of natural languages.
Smith et al. ( 2003) constructed a simulation in which they represented agents as sim -
ple neural networks consisting of two layers of binary neurons. The first layer represented 
binary object properties (each object either had or did not have a particular property). Mean-
while, the second layer represented the presence of specific components in the utterance 
(each utterance was an unordered set of components). The connections between neurons 
were reinforced based on the object-utterance pairs present in the learning input. Then, a set 
of utterances for new objects was produced.
A transmission bottleneck was implemented as follows: agents from the new generation 
observed only a subset of utterances produced by agents of the previous generation. They 
demonstrated that under these circumstances compositional languages—in which indi -
vidual syllables in an utterance are systematically mapped to object properties—emerge. 
Importantly, Kirby et al. ( 2008) replicated the same schema in an experiment involving 
human participants and obtained similar results.
These studies consistently show that a transmission bottleneck introduces evolutionary 
pressure for selecting languages that are relatively easy to learn, which leads to the structuri-
sation of meanings. Structured meanings are fundamentally different from the compound 
expressions with protogrammar analysed by Nowak and Krakauer ( 1999). In that work, 
grammar defined only the structure of an utterance, demanding that the word of a particular 
class appears at a particular position in a sentence, which was in principle independent of 
the word’s meaning. The structure of the compound expressions in Smith et al. (2003) was 
not restricted, but the way agents referred to the properties of objects was systematic: dif -
ferent parts of the expression referred to different properties of objects. This can be called 
compositionality in terms of meanings but without specific grammar (Rorot and Rączaszek-
Leonardi 2023).
Models based on vertical language transmission can be seen as orthogonal to the horizon-
tal LSG. They do not include a coordination problem, but rather a memorisation problem: 
Model Discipline Environ-
ment 
(stimuli)
Signals Available 
actions
Rewards 
and learning 
mechanism
Results/
explanatory 
target
Flo-
reano 
et al. 
(2007)
Robotics 2D envi-
ronment 
(shared by 
all agents)
Light emitted 
by physical 
robots
Continuous 
movement in 
the environ-
ment (available 
to all agents)
Locating food 
and avoiding 
poison are 
rewarded in 
evolution, the 
speaker is not 
rewarded
Commu-
nication 
strategies 
evolve 
under dif-
ferent kin 
structures
Grouchy 
et al. 
(2016)
Robotics & 
linguistics
2D envi-
ronment 
(shared by 
all agents)
Continuous 
scalar
Continuous 
movement in 
the environ-
ment (available 
to all agents)
No explicit 
rewards, two 
agents produc-
ing offspring 
upon contact
The emer-
gence of a 
complex 
mode of 
signification 
with signal-
signal 
relations
Table 1 (continued) 
1 3
65 Page 16 of 40

===PDF PAGE 17===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
agents learn the signalling protocol by observing examples rather than through interaction. 
Vertical and horizontal approaches can be seen as complementary, and some models explic-
itly combine vertical iterated learning with the horizontal LSG. Such a combination of ver-
tical and horizontal transfer was implemented by periodically resetting the weights of the 
neural networks of some agents (clearing their memory; Li and Bowling ( 2019); Cogswell 
et al. (2020)) or by having the agents passively observe the communication protocols of the 
previous generation (Ren et al. 2020).
3.4 Social reasoning facilitating communication
A different line of work looks for pressures for structured communication in pragmatic 
social reasoning, which is involved in language generation and comprehension. In formal 
linguistics, this kind of reasoning is usually approached using the Bayesian Rational Speech 
Act framework (Frank and Goodman 2012). The central idea is to introduce a pragmatic 
sender, which takes into account the receiver’s perspective and chooses a signal that has the 
highest probability of being correctly understood. Then, a pragmatic receiver may consider 
the pragmatic sender’s perspective, and so on.
We recognise that a similar idea was introduced in the communication emergence lit -
erature by Batali ( 1998), who attempted to explain the origin of the structure of natural 
languages. His simulations preserved the basic sender-receiver structure of the LSG, but the 
sender used its own language comprehension module to predict the receiver’s responses. 
Based on these predictions, it generated a signal that would be easy to interpret—an 
approach dubbed “obverter” (Oliphant and Batali 1997). The population of agents learnt 
in a self-supervised manner: a pair of randomly selected agents interacted in each round. 
The sender acted as a teacher for the receiver, and, importantly, the roles were periodically 
swapped. The language that emerged had compositional properties similar to the language 
emerging in the experiments by Smith et al. ( 2003), as some parts of the signal sequence 
had systematic meanings. Furthermore, the agents were able to generalise and communicate 
novel combinations of meanings not present in the training set.
The obverter mechanism uses the same signal-meaning mapping for language genera -
tion and comprehension. This guarantees that agents are internally consistent and use the 
language they learnt in the receiver role when they assume the speaker role. It can be inter-
preted as a rudimentary form of social reasoning: the sender produces the signal, which has 
the highest probability of mapping to the desired object if the sender itself were to interpret 
this signal. Imagine that the receiver is the source of the language, and the sender attempts 
to learn the language of the receiver (the obverter mechanism makes the sender explic -
itly adjust to the receiver). Within a single round of the game the sender is able to learn 
only a single association at best, which makes language transfer imperfect. As the roles are 
assigned at random, in the next round, the sender may become a new receiver and a source 
of language for a new sender, further propagating its learning biases. Exchanging sender-
receiver roles effectively creates a transmission chain with a learning bottleneck similar to 
the iterated learning setting (Smith et al. 2003). Such a transmission chain constitutes a pres-
sure for a systematic communication protocol. The obverter mechanism was implemented 
in modern neural networks by Choi et al. (2018) and Bogin et al. (2019), who also observed 
an increase in compositionality.
1 3
Page 17 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 18===
J. Zubek et al.
More complex mechanisms of social reasoning have also been explored. A good example 
is the work of Jaques et al. (2019), who introduced the concept of social influence as an aux-
iliary reward for agents communicating to solve a sequential social dilemma. The authors 
presented a measure of social influence which incorporated counterfactual reasoning: an 
agent considered the alternative signals it could have sent and the plausible actions the 
other agent could have taken in this alternative world. Based on that, the first agent assessed 
whether actions of the other agent were contingent on its signalling or would have been 
taken regardless of the signal value.
In one variant of their simulations, agents’ used their own assessment of whether their 
signals were influential to estimate their social influence reward. In order to achieve this, 
one agent predicted the actions of the other agent using a specialised internal model trained 
in a supervised manner. Unlike in Batali (1998), the model of the other agent was separated 
from the main model that controlled the actions of the agent. The authors did not focus on 
the signal structure, but showed that supporting communication with counterfactual reason-
ing leads to faster convergence, higher cumulative rewards, and higher mutual information 
between signals and actions. Even if agents did not have an explicit communication chan -
nel, influence rewards incentivised them to develop an ostensive communication protocol 
by pointing out important locations by staying still at these locations. This pointing behav -
iour emerged because, from the beginning, agents viewed their actions as means to not 
only achieve their immediate goals but also to influence others. The dual meaning of the 
action—performative and communicative—followed the dual structure of the reward func -
tion including both task performance and social influence.
The results of these simulations suggest that some aspects of social reasoning are neces-
sary to introduce pressures for communication relevance and the ease of interpretability (in 
line with Grice’s maxims of conversation (Grice 1975)), which drive language evolution. 
Consequently, agents might require certain cognitive preadaptations for social cooperation 
or scaffolding in the form of existing social relations in order to establish a nontrivial com-
munication protocol.
3.5 Bidirectional influences between perception and communication
Harnad ( 1990) posed the famous symbol grounding problem, which asks how symbols 
(which he understood as elements of the symbol system that are subject to formal syntactic 
manipulations) can refer to anything in the outside world. He suggested that when natural 
languages are being developed and learned, symbols are initially grounded in basic per -
ceptual processes, and then more abstract learned or innate categories are formed around 
perceptual features.
Among works in communication emergence that explicitly address the symbol ground -
ing problem, the work of Steels and Belpaeme (2005) stands out as particularly comprehen-
sive. The authors used a variant of a language game, which they called a guessing game. 
Similar to the standard LSG, it involved a sender and a receiver communicating the proper-
ties of the presented stimuli: vectors of real numbers representing colours. In contrast to the 
standard LSG, in which there is no context, here the sender was presented a single “target” 
stimulus in the context of three other “distractor” stimuli. The stimuli were drawn at ran -
dom. The only restriction was that the target had to be sufficiently distinct from distractors–
this was determined by the size of just-noticeable difference between colours as estimated 
1 3
65 Page 18 of 40

===PDF PAGE 19===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
in human-subject studies. The receiver was presented with both the sender signal and the 
same set of stimuli, and its task was to correctly choose the target stimulus. Each agent 
used a lexicon module—a mapping between discrete categories and words—and an adap -
tive categorisation module responsible for forming categories in a continuous perceptual 
space. The lexicon was updated whenever a previously unknown word was encountered. 
Successful communication required the coordination of both vocabulary and perceptual cat-
egories. In the simulation, a population of agents interacted randomly with each other freely 
exchanging sender and receiver roles. No colour categorisation was designed as “correct”.
The authors demonstrated how a conventionalised categorisation of the colour stimuli 
may emerge through linguistic interaction. The vocabulary was also shared within the popu-
lation and-through the categorisation module-grounded in the perceptual properties of the 
stimuli. Similar models were used to study how aspects such as innate perceptual biases 
(Baronchelli et al. 2015; Ohmer et al. 2022) or the topology of a social network (Centola 
and Baronchelli 2015; Zubek et al. 2017) affect the formation of categories. Further work 
by Steels (2015) brought guessing game schema to the context of developmental robotics, 
where simulated agents were replaced with physically embodied robots. Spranger ( 2016) 
extended the model and used it to demonstrate the emergence of spatial language. These 
models are unique because they demonstrate that both signal-category associations and the 
perceptual categories themselves can be subject to conventions formed bottom-up through 
interaction.
3.6 Signals grounded in raw sensory inputs
The advent of convolutional neural networks made it feasible to introduce more realistic 
visual stimuli into communication emergence models, substituting discrete tokens from the 
basic LSG with images. Some of the first works exploring this path were conducted by Laz-
aridou et al. (2017) and Lazaridou et al. (2018). The departure from pre-processed symbolic 
tokens input (e.g. encoding an object as a binary vector) in favour of raw visual input (i.e. 
arrays of RGB pixels) requires the sender to deal with entangled input and decompose it into 
relevant factors of variation (e.g. shape and colour) on its own. Lazaridou et al. (2017) dem-
onstrated that a model trained using reinforcement learning learned to successfully play a 
referential game (although, it was not fully trained end-to-end as it used a pretrained module 
to extract image features). Moreover, Lazaridou et al. (2018) observed that when compound 
signals were used, emergent communication protocols were, on average, more systematic 
for symbolic object representations than for raw pixel inputs. Communication protocols 
emerging with visual input did not always capture interpretable, concept-level properties 
of visual scenes presented to the agents. Instead, agents learned to successfully distinguish 
images while overfitting to the inscrutable low-level relational properties of images.
Bouchacourt and Baroni (2018) demonstrated that agents can solve guessing games with 
high accuracy even when the input data contains no conceptual content at all-for example, 
when images comprise random noise sampled from a Gaussian distribution. Researchers 
discovered ways to foster more systematic communication protocols with visual input, for 
instance, by increasing the number of available targets (Mu and Goodman 2021). How-
ever, the overall conclusion is that realistic visual input alone does not contribute to the 
structure of language. Systematic structures must be present in the way agents perceive the 
environment.
1 3
Page 19 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 20===
J. Zubek et al.
3.7 Multi-task learning: actions beyond signalling
Embedding the LSG in a realistic context requires that the agents are able to perform actions 
other than emitting signals. Then, the structure of the emerging communication protocol 
could be influenced by the demands of simultaneous signalling and acting in the environ -
ment. Among works exploring this matter, we have chosen the model presented by Can -
gelosi (1999, 2001) as particularly interesting, since it grounds computational simulations 
in a deeper semiotic theory produced by Deacon ( 1997) (which is his own reinterpretation 
of Peircean semiotics). Deacon views communication emergence as a multi-stage process, 
during which one type of sign is transformed into another. He distinguishes between iconic 
signs grounded through perceived similarity, indexical signs grounded in spatio-temporal 
contingencies, and symbolic signs, which are grounded primarily in relations with other 
signs. According to his proposal, indices can be transformed into symbols through weak -
ening sign-referent associations (think: word and concrete objects in the world) while 
strengthening sign-sign associations (think: syntactic rules). Symbols can thus be viewed as 
denoting more abstract relations that can be transferred between contexts.
Cangelosi attempted to simulate this process in a population of agents foraging for mush-
rooms of different types. Agents were rewarded for correctly identifying a mushroom type 
based on unreliable perceptual input and a signal produced by their peers. The identifica -
tion meant correctly classifying a mushroom as either edible or inedible, and, in the case of 
edible mushrooms, classifying its subtype. Each agent was controlled by a separate neural 
network. Networks were evolved through a simple genetic algorithm (population learning) 
and fine-tuned using backpropagation (individual learning). The agent network had separate 
output layers responsible for identifying mushrooms and producing signals, and a hidden 
layer was shared between these two tasks.
Communication had a structure similar to the basic signalling game, in which an agent 
foraging for mushrooms was the receiver, and its parent from the previous genetic algo -
rithm generation was the sender. The sender was presented with a true vector of perceptual 
properties of a given mushroom and produced a two-component signal. The receiver was 
presented with a noisy version of the vector of mushroom properties and the sender’s signal. 
It had a double task of correctly identifying the mushroom (rewarded in the evolutionary 
timescale) and recreating the sender’s signal (trained with backpropagation in a supervised 
manner). This elaborate setup led to the emergence of a systematic communication protocol 
with disentangled mushroom properties.
To check the generalisation capabilities of these systems, Cangelosi applied a test based 
on Deacon’s interpretation of the classic experiments of teaching language to chimpanzees 
(Savage-Rumbaugh and Rumbaugh 1978; Savage-Rumbaugh et al. 1980). The rationale for 
this is as follows: let us assume that we know some basic vocabulary in one language. Then, 
some new foreign vocabulary is introduced in a grounded manner, albeit for a limited num-
ber of examples. Next, the learner is presented with combinations of words in the foreign 
language that allow them to recognise a familiar grammatical rule. Afterwards, the learner 
should be able to correctly use the foreign words in combinations, even if they were not 
introduced explicitly for all examples.
This schema was replicated 1–1 with the neural networks. The trained network repre -
sented the properties of mushrooms A and B with independent symbols. Cangelosi retrained 
the network using backpropagation to substitute existing symbols for property A for two-
1 3
65 Page 20 of 40

===PDF PAGE 21===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
thirds of mushrooms with new symbols. Then, he introduced new symbols for property 
B and taught the network how symbols for properties A and B are composed together in 
two-component signals. Finally, he introduced new symbols for property A for the remain-
ing third of the mushrooms. At this point, the network was able to correctly associate all 
symbols A and B even though this association was explicitly given only for two-thirds of 
mushrooms.
This kind of generalisation goes beyond the generalisation of responses to new stimuli; 
this is a systematic transfer of relations formed between one group of symbols to a new 
group (in accordance with Deacon’s semiotic framework). Using the terms of Barrett and 
Skyrms ( 2017), we consider this an example of template transfer, by which the stimuli 
remain the same but the response repertoire changes. Cangelosi et al. (2002) interpreted this 
generalisation as a process of “symbolic theft”, by which preexisting grounded symbols and 
the relations between them are used to ground new ones. We suspect that the agents’ ability 
to transfer the structure of relations to new symbols is a consequence of the simultaneous 
involvement of both sender and receiver in classification and signalling tasks. This involve-
ment forced them to disentangle relevant factors of variability in the environment in their 
internal representations. However, this was not tested directly in the original work.7
3.8 Modelling an ecological niche for communication
Some of the models inspired by artificial life research have focused more on the role of the 
ecology and how it may shape a niche in which communication evolves than on the archi -
tecture of or interactions between individual agents. One study of this kind was conducted 
by Loula et al. (2010). They were inspired by the ecology of vervet monkeys-animals with a 
particularly sophisticated set of alarm calls. In the simulation, a group of herbivore creatures 
explored a 2D environment looking for edible plants while avoiding predators. Contrary to 
the basic LSG, signalling behaviours existed within the natural ecology of the simulated 
environment, going beyond static sender-receiver interactions. Simulated creatures could 
see nearby objects, hear vocalisations, and select predefined actions based on their percep -
tion and internal drives (hunger, fear, boredom, etc.). Actions were high-level behaviours, 
such as scanning the environment, wandering, fleeing, hiding, climbing a tree, and vocalis-
ing. The communication was not limited to sender-receiver pairs: any creature within the 
vicinity was able to hear a vocalisation and react to it (possibly with another vocalisation).
No particular reaction was distinguished as “correct”. Systematic associations between 
vocalisations (signals) and predator types (meanings) were spontaneously self-organised 
through Hebbian learning of associations between stimuli in this ecology. The authors dem-
onstrated how the emergence of signals transforms ecology. At first, creatures reacted to 
signals by scanning their environment for potential predators: all signals were interpreted 
as general alarm calls signalling danger. Later, when signals were well learnt, the creatures 
took actions adequate for the predator type (fleeing, hiding, or climbing a tree) immediately 
after hearing the signal without ever seeing the predator. Moreover, the creatures repeated 
the signal they just heard to warn the others. This is consistent with the example of signal -
ling game self-assembly given by Barrett and Skyrms (2017).
7 In Cangelosi’s simulations, agents also moved in a 2D environment and had to approach a mushroom before 
picking it up. However, since they did not have any memory, their movement trajectory did not influence their 
classifications or contribute to the structure of their communication.
1 3
Page 21 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 22===
J. Zubek et al.
Loula et al. ( 2010) demonstrated a shift between different forms of signification, by 
which the same signals gradually changed meaning and started referring to entities not 
directly present. Such a shift is possible by grounding communication in a sufficiently rich 
ecology. Complexification of an ecological niche might be a necessary step on the road 
towards symbolic communication from simpler signals.
3.9 Embodied and situated communication
In the vanilla LSG, all actions are discrete: the model abstracts away from the dynamics of 
action in a continuous environment. If we were to take embodiment more seriously, in line 
with the proposition of ecological approaches to cognition (Rączaszek-Leonardi 2024), we 
would have to consider the spatio-temporal characteristics of the processes of acting and 
signalling as viable sources of communication structure. We have selected two examples of 
works pursuing this direction.
The first is the work by Mordatch and Abbeel ( 2018), which is well-known in the AI 
community. In their simulation, a 2D continuous space was populated with agents and 
coloured landmarks. Agents could move in the space and emit discrete signals, and their 
policies were represented by a recurrent neural network (all agents shared the same policy 
network). Each agent was given private information about the action the other agent must 
undertake, so agents had to instruct one another. The agents were trained with backpropaga-
tion to communicate to the other agent the correct action (e.g. GOTO) and object that this 
action must target (e.g. BLUE).8 The communication protocol that emerged in the simula -
tions had a compositional verb-noun structure. Compositionality was encouraged through 
a soft limit on vocabulary size that made agents reuse already known words (introducing a 
new word was penalised).
The ability of an agent to move freely contrasts with dominant settings, according to 
which the sender passively observes a stimulus (independently of any actions it can under -
take) and the receiver waits for a message to undertake an action. The fact that the sender 
could move enabled nonverbal communication as the receiver used, for example, the gaze 
direction or physical movement of the sender to inform its actions. Moreover, according 
to the authors, the physical properties of the environment and agent communication (e.g. 
actions and utterances that take time to accomplish) shaped the syntactic structure of the 
utterances. In the communication protocol that emerged, the GOTO action type signal was 
uttered before the landmark signal, allowing the receiver to “prepare” for further actions by 
moving to an advantageous central position among the landmarks before starting to move 
towards the specific one.
The second example of a work exploring a rich and structured environment as a potential 
source of structure appearing in language comes from the robotics tradition. Floreano et al. 
(2007) employed a swarm of mobile robots that navigated their way through a 2D space to 
discover a food source and avoid a poison source. The robots were controlled by neural net-
works evolved through an evolutionary algorithm, in which fitness was determined by their 
8 The authors remarked that agents could, in principle, be trained using reinforcement learning, but for practi-
cal reasons, they decided against it. Instead, they built a fully differentiable system consisting of two agents 
and their environment, and they trained it end-to-end using backpropagation. Gumbel-Softmax was used to 
make the discrete communication channel differentiable. The training was supervised in the sense that the 
training signal contained information about correct actions, but it did not contain information about correct 
signals - goal-signal associations emerged spontaneously.
1 3
65 Page 22 of 40

===PDF PAGE 23===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
food intake. They could emit light signals, which helped other robots locate food, but this 
created competition for resources: spatial limitation of the environments allowed only a lim-
ited number of robots to feed at the same time. Contrary to the standard LSG, there were no 
sender-receiver roles, no turn-taking, and no explicit reward for successful communication. 
The results indicate that cooperative communication can emerge among kin groups even 
if signalling is costly for individuals. More varied behaviours, such as the emergence of 
deceptive communication in groups of nonrelated robots, were also observed. Importantly, 
the values and costs of communication in these experiments were not arbitrarily introduced 
but emerged from the properties of the environment.
Based on these two examples, we conclude that embodied simulations add many degrees 
of freedom to the model, making it more difficult to analyse while also allowing for new, 
often unexpected, pressures that enable communication structure to emerge. Such pressures 
might be essential for moving towards symbolic communication.
3.10 Combining concepts across games
Some works in robotics examine communication emergence in even more structured envi -
ronments. As an example, we present the work of Schulz et al. ( 2012), which is both tech-
nically sophisticated and theoretically ambitious. They experimented with mobile robots, 
which navigated a natural environment (office space) and learned to refer to specific loca -
tions within that environment. The robots could move freely in their environment and con -
struct private maps of the space based on visual stimuli and self-motion odometry (using 
the RatSLAM algorithm (Milford and Wyeth 2010)). The map for each agent was slightly 
different, as it reflected each agent’s individual experience.
When two robots met, they were able to hear unique signals that they emitted, and they 
engaged in sender-receiver guessing games inspired by Steels and Belpaeme ( 2005). The 
structure of these games was explicitly programmed by the authors and was independent of 
the agents’ motor activities. The only aspect that was modified through the games was the 
association map between signals and spatial locations in the private map. The new element 
was that the agents played a sequence of progressively more structured games and that the 
concepts acquired through these games were interrelated.
They started by playing a where-are-we game in which they named the location of their 
meeting. After a few games, the agents had conventionalised the lexicons of location names 
grounded in their private spatial maps. Then, the researchers made the robots play two new 
games, how-far and what-direction, using grounded location names. In the how-far game, 
two locations were named and the robots had to negotiate words to express the distance 
between them. In the what-direction game, three locations were named and the robots coor-
dinated terms to express an angle between the two locations from the point of view of the 
third. After they coordinated their lexicons, they were able to use both location names and 
relational vocabulary to successfully play go-to games when they arranged to meet at a 
specific location. Then, in the where-is-there game, the agents used the relational vocabu -
lary to name the locations they had not yet visited. The labels established during this last 
game remained abstract until the agents were able to discover previously unknown locations 
through exploration.
The achievement of this model is a particularly clear presentation of two different meth-
ods of grounding vocabulary. The first was direct grounding in the experiences of spatial 
1 3
Page 23 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 24===
J. Zubek et al.
locations. The second was indirect grounding in the relations between already established 
concepts. Schulz et al. (2012) demonstrated how this more advanced type of grounding can 
be achieved when simpler games are combined using a modular composition schema (Bar-
rett and Skyrms 2017). Combining games required a progressive complexification of agent 
interactions (here, explicitly encoded in the structure of guessing games) and a conceptual 
space allowing meaningful operations on concepts (here, spatial maps of the environment). 
Such double grounding is a compelling idea in cognitive science and may be indispensable 
for abstract concepts to emerge (Rączaszek-Leonardi and Zubek 2023).
3.11 Situated coordinative dialogue
The LSG is structured to portray a descriptive function of communication: the sender 
describes the state of affairs unknown to the receiver. The communication is unidirectional 
and follows knowledge asymmetry. Only a few models depart from this assumption. Among 
them, we recognise the work of Grouchy et al. (2016), which stands out due to the original 
modelling techniques used. The authors modelled a scenario involving no external states 
to communicate; the scenario only contained agents that coordinated their movements in a 
continuous 2D space to meet each other.
They simulated colonies of mobile robots with controllers evolved through genetic pro -
gramming (evolved controllers were later transferred to physical robots: e-pucks). The con-
trollers took the form of ordinary differential equations that defined the relationship between 
robot sensors and actuators. The robots could not see each other but could hear signals 
emitted by nearby peers. The robots communicated by emitting sounds (the communica -
tion channel was continuous and one-dimensional). Whenever two robots met in space, 
they crossed their genetic material and produced offspring. There was no explicit reward 
or fitness function, but the reproduction mechanism favoured robots that were able to find 
each other more efficiently, which, in turn, applied evolutionary pressure on emitting and 
interpreting sounds, thereby developing an efficient communication system.
Most populations of robots evolved communication systems in which the emitted signals 
corresponded to the robot’s position in one of the two dimensions. Some populations used 
this communication strategy for a while but later on evolved more complex strategies, by 
which the signals emitted by two robots became co-dependent: a signal emitted by one robot 
was modulated by the signal emitted by the other robot. The dialogical communication 
established between the two robots became a dynamic control structure, which facilitated 
their meeting. The two modes of communication depended on each other since the dialogi-
cal communication strategy emerged from the simpler one. Conceptually, this resembles the 
modular composition of signalling games proposed by Barrett and Skyrms (2017), although 
here, the signalling structure is fully emergent, without explicit roles, rewards, and so on.
Grouchy et al.’s model remains original, as it challenges many assumptions common in 
communication emergence models: a) it uses continuous signals instead of discrete signs, b) 
it does not reward agents explicitly, and c) it explores a form of communication that is less 
about representing states of the world and more about the dynamic coordination of behav -
iour. Concerning b) and c), the model by Floreano et al. (2007) is similar.
1 3
65 Page 24 of 40

===PDF PAGE 25===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
4 Emergence, function of communication, and the mapping metaphor
The structure of existing models reveals commendable efforts to investigate various facets 
of the communication emergence problem. These models have demonstrated stable com -
munication protocol formation under diverse circumstances (Spike et al. 2017). The proto-
cols are efficient, as they enable agents to carry out tasks effectively, and some simulations 
highlight the benefits of explicit signalling compared to a situation without a designated 
communication channel (e.g. Jaques et al. 2019; Mordatch and Abbeel 2018). Emergent 
protocols often allow for generalisation to new contexts (e.g. Cangelosi 2001; Schulz et al. 
2012) and display a certain degree of systematicity (or compositionality) (e.g. Mordatch and 
Abbeel 2018; Chaabouni et al. 2020).
The iterated learning model provides a convincing explanation for the basic compo -
sitionality of natural languages as a solution to the transmission bottleneck and language 
learnability problem (Kirby et al. 2014, 2015). Recent advancements fuelled by the imple -
mentation of deep neural networks (Lazaridou and Baroni 2020; Chaabouni et al. 2022) 
enhanced individual agents’ cognitive capabilities, which contributed to more biologically 
authentic simulations. Agents are now able to handle more realistic inputs such as images 
(Lazaridou et al. 2018), navigate more intricate environments, including social environ -
ments (Batali 1998; Jaques et al. 2019), and align their signals with basic English vocabu -
lary (Lazaridou et al. 2020).
Despite these advancements, some questions about the emergence and evolution of sym-
bolic communication remain open. These include the emergence of discrete signs from ordi-
nary actions in interactions, the trajectory necessary for such signs to evolve into symbols 
embedded within a network of symbol-symbol relations, the contextual plasticity of sym -
bols, and, in connection with this, non-trivial compositionality (aspects of compositional -
ity beyond the logical intersection of two sets (Steinert-Threlkeld 2020)). The adoption of 
specialised neural network architectures, such as convolutional neural networks (LeCun et 
al. 1989), long short-term memory networks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) or trans-
formers (Vaswani et al. 2017) have allowed agents to process more realistic inputs or longer 
sequences of tokens. However, this alone does not address the fundamental questions above.
It is telling that, while a great many works use the term “language emergence” or “com-
munication emergence”, only a few have attempted to define this term more precisely, apply 
a specific theory of emergence, and discuss which aspects of the simulation are emergent 
and which are straightforward consequences of the assumed model structure (Di Paolo 
1997; Hutchins and Johnson 2009; Loula et al. 2010). Taking this into account, we suggest 
that progress is hindered not by the lack of sophisticated computational architectures but by 
the lack of reflection upon some basic assumptions behind language emergence modelling.
We identify several gross categories of simplifications, which-while useful in addressing 
concrete engineering problems or concrete isolated theoretical questions-might obscure the 
essential properties of symbolic communication that need to be addressed in a successful 
explanatory model: 
1. Lack of emergence. In existing models, communication rarely truly emerges, as symbols 
are predefined and given as discrete numbers or vectors. They usually form a separate 
modality distinct from the perceptual input, which is already designed for communica-
tion by the model structure. The problem of the conventionalisation of discrete signals 
1 3
Page 25 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 26===
J. Zubek et al.
and symbols emerging from interactions is excluded. The existence of discrete symbols 
is presupposed rather than explained. Agents’ actions also tend to be discrete and devoid 
of dynamics, preventing the emergence of new forms of organisation. This assumption 
is somewhat relaxed in only a couple of models (pointing and “gaze” direction in Mor-
datch and Abbeel (2018), movement and use of light properties for communication in 
Floreano et al. (2007), and continuous signals and movement in Grouchy et al. (2016)).
2. Limiting the function of communication. In most of the existing models, communica -
tion has a single function which is explicitly rewarded. The focus on the descriptive 
function of communication is evident in settings where there is knowledge asymmetry 
between agents, and one agent is rewarded for passing certain information about the 
world to the other. The imperative or coordinative function of communication concern-
ing the regulation of the ongoing interaction (for example, by eliciting certain behav -
iours of the interaction partner) is subordinate to the descriptive function (as in Schulz 
et al. (2012), where robots first learn descriptive communication and then use it impera-
tively). A notable exception is the model of Grouchy et al. (2016), which demonstrates 
how coordination can be independent of the description of the external environment.
3. Mapping metaphor. The meaning of language is reduced to mapping discrete signals 
to discrete referents. The meaning-mapping assumption is visible in the basic LSG, in 
which the reward is maximised when the emerging signals can be uniquely mapped 
to the states of the world. Compositionality is understood in terms of more complex 
structured mappings (Korbak et al. 2020). In the simplified environments adopted by 
most simulations, actions performed by agents and action history do not significantly 
contribute to the meaning of communication. An effort to break free from the map -
ping metaphor is visible in Loula et al. (2010), where emerging meaning is understood 
as a transformation of the ecological niche rather than simple mapping. Moreover, in 
Grouchy et al. ( 2016), signals allow functional coordination without mapping to spe -
cific referents.All these simplifications are in line with the basic structure of the LSG 
as seen through the lenses of Shannon’s information transmission (Skyrms 2010). They 
can be viewed as interdependent; for instance, a mapping metaphor assumes the exis -
tence of discrete signals and referents, thereby strengthening the notion that they are 
preexisting rather than emerging in the process of communication as well. Similarly, if 
we consider the fundamental role of communication to be descriptive, building a word-
meaning mapping emerges as a logical solution. Although some existing models depart 
from these simplifications (usually not all three of them at once) the simplifications hold 
surprisingly strong in general. We assume that this is due to a widespread approach to 
symbols, which treats them as something “given”, existing independently of meaning, 
similar to unbound variables in a computer program ready to be associated with some 
values. Symbols are thus perceived as discrete abstract entities with formal properties 
that can be manipulated.
Years of dominance of the information processing and computer metaphor in the cognitive 
sciences have resulted in thinking about symbols as necessary assumptions before con -
structing explanations. This makes it easy to forget that their existence also needs to be 
explained. Consequently, models focus on how we can manipulate symbols, combine them, 
and decipher their meaning or “ground” them. However, the problem of the emergence of 
complex communication essentially includes the problem of symbol emergence: how do 
1 3
65 Page 26 of 40

===PDF PAGE 27===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
they come into being in the first place? What kinds of meaningful relations do they require 
to be described as symbols (Rączaszek-Leonardi et al. 2018)?
Using abstract symbols with arbitrary meanings as a starting point is also limiting because 
it puts the burden of structuring communication on the conventions created from scratch by 
the agents and realised by their internal architectures, while the role of interactions with a 
richly structured environment is neglected or limited. In the real world, forces from multiple 
sources shape and structure communication. For instance, the physical properties of signals 
also partly determine their meanings (like the light direction in Floreano et al. (2007)), and 
situated agents can only communicate effectively within a certain distance (as in Loula et al. 
(2010)). Neglecting the ways symbols might be created in interactions within a particular 
ecology obscures these sources of complexity, leaving us only with the simplified view of 
communication meaning as mapping from symbols to features (Rączaszek-Leonardi and 
Deacon 2018).
5 Sources of communication complexity
Following the above review and the summary of theoretical considerations, we have identi-
fied some of the most important sources of communication complexity explored by different 
models. We discuss which of them could be explored in more depth in order to relax three 
simplifying assumptions identified in the previous section.
5.1 Perceptual grounding
Grounding language in perception sets most emergent communication models apart from 
distributional semantic approaches, by which language meaning is derived solely from word 
co-occurrences. In perceptually grounded models, the agent’s perception plays a crucial 
role in shaping language structure. For instance, in Steels and Belpaeme (2005), vocabulary 
structure was influenced by agents’ perceptual capabilities defined in terms of the size of 
just-noticeable difference between colours. Smaller size of the just-noticeable difference led 
to a larger number of perceptual categories and larger vocabulary. To explore the effects of 
perceptual grounding, some models employ realistic stimuli (e.g. images represented as raw 
RGB pixel arrays, as demonstrated in Lazaridou et al. (2018)), and incorporate realistic per-
ceptual systems, including multimodality, limitations of an agent’s senses, and perceptual 
noise, among others Evtimova et al. (2018); Hoang et al. (2024).
Making an agent’s perception more realistic increases the complexity of the model, 
but it does not guarantee that a more structured and systematic communication protocol 
will emerge. In fact, as shown in Lazaridou et al. ( 2018), communication protocols trained 
with image input were less structured than those with symbolic tokens input. As long as 
perceived stimuli-however complex-are objects that are mapped to signals, perceptually 
grounded models do not solve our issues connected with the mapping metaphor.
5.2 Sensorimotor grounding
Another level is grounding language not only in passive perception, but in experiences 
gained from active exploration of the environment (active perception, Gibson (1966)). Such 
1 3
Page 27 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 28===
J. Zubek et al.
grounding requires an embodied agent capable of nontrivial actions that affect states of the 
world that later affect the perception of the agent (closing the sensorimotor loop). Simple 
extensions of the signalling game model or machine learning models inspired by image 
captioning or question answering tasks preclude that. Sensorimotor grounding is possible 
in embodied simulations, such as Mordatch and Abbeel ( 2018), where agents move in the 
environment and perform sequences of actions, which in turn opens up additional pos -
sibilities for language complexification. Research in robotics has shown that agents with 
closed sensorimotor loops and relatively simple perceptual input are able to evolve interest-
ing communication systems (Floreano et al. 2007). With sensorimotor grounding, agents 
can use communication to directly coordinate their actions. More complex sensorimotor 
grounding can potentially be a way to move away from the meaning-mapping metaphor and 
from the descriptive function of communication, as suggested by experiments with infants 
and embodied robots (Wrede et al. 2009; Rohlfing et al. 2016; Lyon et al. 2016).
5.3 Properties of sign vehicles
Communication complexity can also be induced by the physical properties of sign vehicles 
(signals) used in communication. As we observed before, many models utilise discrete and 
amodal signs and do not explore physicality of signs as a dimension of communication 
complexity at all (they treat symbols as given, not emergent). Some models follow the typi-
cal sender-receiver schema but introduce noise into the signal space (Nowak and Krakauer 
1999; Kuciński et al. 2021) or allow for discrete signals to emerge from a continuous signal 
space (Geffen Lan et al. 2020; Lieck and Rohrmeier 2021)-these could be treated as the first 
steps in this direction.
In embodied models where signals have physical vehicles, such as the model of Flo -
reano et al. ( 2007), which uses light signals, the properties of vehicles and the properties 
of the perceptual systems of agents interact. This interaction imposes new constraints on 
the agents’ interaction scenarios-for example, communication may be possible only in the 
vicinity of another agent. In addition, physical sign vehicles allow us to explore aspects 
of iconicity—the similarity between a sign vehicle and its referent (be it an object, action, 
event, etc.)—which cannot be studied using amodal signs (Hutchins and Johnson 2009). 
The complexification of sign vehicles is necessary to eliminate the assumption concerning 
the pre-existence of discrete symbols and allow them to emerge (Taniguchi et al. 2016).
5.4 Complexity of the environment
It is generally recognised that a sufficiently complex environment is necessary for complex 
communication to emerge. Within the basic LSG schema, the degrees of freedom of signals 
are limited by the degrees of freedom of stimuli. Simulations that deal with natural images 
as stimuli explore this dimension of complexity. However, as demonstrated by Bouchacourt 
and Baroni (2018), using complex stimuli does not automatically lead to meaningful con -
ceptual representations in agents.
With the recent success of large language models, some researchers speculate that simply 
increasing the size and variability of training data could bring the internal representations of 
models closer to interpretable concepts. Recent works demonstrate that meaningful spatio-
temporal and truth-false relations can be recovered from language model activations using 
1 3
65 Page 28 of 40

===PDF PAGE 29===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
linear probes (Gurnee and Tegmark 2024; Marks and Tegmark 2024). According to the Pla-
tonic representation hypothesis (Huh et al. 2024), as training data grows, representations of 
models trained on different tasks and modalities (vision and language) converge towards a 
shared statistical model of reality. This could have implications for grounded language mod-
els building associations across modalities. However, it does not directly address our main 
points regarding the mapping metaphor, and thus increasing training data alone is unlikely 
to lead to genuine symbolic reference.
Another dimension of environment complexity found in more embodied simulations is 
the inherent environmental dynamics: how does the state and/or changes in the environment 
affect the agents, and how the agents, in turn, affect the environment? All simulations that 
incorporate agent movement tap into this dimension. In more dynamic environments, it is 
easier to release assumptions concerning the descriptive function of communication and 
meaning-mapping. Naturally, environmental complexity can be exploited only if it aligns 
with the perceptual and sensorimotor capabilities of the agents.
Finally, the environment may be fully observable—when the agent has full access to the 
environment’s state—or only partially observable. Even embodied simulations in the style 
of Mordatch and Abbeel ( 2018) tend to prefer fully observable environments, which are 
easier for agents to learn in and have less ambiguous communication. The ambiguity intro-
duced by partially observable environments may add to the complexity of communication 
and help to further relax meaning-mapping assumptions (Gregoromichelaki and Kempson 
2019; Rączaszek-Leonardi et al. 2014).
5.5 Agents’ architecture and learning mechanism
The agents’ policies are constrained by the agents’ architecture (e.g. feed-forward or recur-
rent neural network, set of stimuli-response rules, differential equation), among other 
things. Humans possess certain cognitive biases, one notable example being the limita -
tions of working memory (Baddeley 2003). As established by the No-Free-Lunch Theorem 
(Wolpert 1996), every learning algorithm has a preference for specific problem types and 
consequently introduces biases that favour certain communication protocols over others. 
The strength of these biases may be moderated by the flexibility of the algorithm. In con -
trast to a simple neural network without a hidden layer, as employed in the work of Smith 
et al. (2003), which can only represent additively linear influences of object properties on 
signal components, a multilayer network, used in more recent studies (Ren et al. 2020), 
can represent a broader range of relationships. The introduction of the transformer neural 
network architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) has revolutionised natural language processing 
based on extensive language corpora; however, this architecture carries its own biases that 
may not align well with human cognition. Some studies have pointed out that transform -
ers possess limited capabilities in modelling formal languages and generalising relations 
to out-of-distribution data (Hahn 2020; Wang and Steinert-Threlkeld 2023). Generally, we 
anticipate that novel network architectures will prove beneficial for learning relationships 
in more intricate task structures. However, they do not directly address our issues with the 
three simplifying assumptions.
Another point of concern is the agents’ learning mechanism (e.g. supervised learning, 
reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithm) and its biological realism. For example, 
Mordatch and Abbeel (2018) used direct weight sharing between agents and the full knowl-
1 3
Page 29 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 30===
J. Zubek et al.
edge of the dynamics of the environment in their optimisation procedure. They backpropa-
gate loss directly through the full model, making it a case of supervised learning. Such a 
procedure is very efficient but raises the question whether it does not circumvent some 
important challenges in language learning that shape language structure (in accordance with 
the pressure for language learnability (Brighton et al. 2005a, b)). On the other side of the 
spectrum there are models such as Schulz et al. (2012) and Loula et al. (2010) that used spe-
cialised vocabulary learning mechanisms, where only signal associations were updated, and 
other aspects of agents’ activity (i.e., locomotion) were not learnable. Such compartmentali-
sation of agents’ learning may prevent the emergence of more interesting phenomena, where 
behaviour and signalling forms a single, tightly-coupled system (Grouchy et al. 2016).
5.6 Communication function, agent goals and autonomy
Obviously, communication can only evolve if it is useful. Seemingly, there is no single uni-
versal function of communication in the natural world. Communication appears in different 
forms, both when communicating individuals have a common goal and when the goals are 
different, in the context of cooperation between individuals and competition between them, 
both as faithful and as deceptive communication (Wacewicz and Żywiczyński 2018). In 
computational simulations, these aspects are usually modelled as the fitness/cost function. 
In the basic signalling game, successful communication is the ultimate goal and is rewarded 
directly and symmetrically. Meanwhile, in Cangelosi (2001) and Floreano et al. (2007), it is 
only a means to successfully locate food, and the rewards are different for the speaker and 
the receiver. Most models consider cooperative scenarios, although some explore the condi-
tions under which deceptive communication emerges (e.g. Mitri et al. 2009).
Grouchy et al. ( 2016) included no explicit cost function at all. Instead, artificial agents 
were allowed to reproduce whenever two of them met in the same place (analogue of sexual 
reproduction). Communication arose from evolutionary pressure. We argue that, compared 
to other types of simulations, agents in this kind of simulation have more autonomy and a 
better chance of evolving a communication system beyond the expectations of the modeller. 
This kind of autonomy may help relax the assumptions concerning discrete symbols and the 
descriptive function of communication.
5.7 Social adaptations and social relationships
Somewhat related to the above, pressures on the structure of communication arise from liv-
ing in a society. Social pressures may come in two varieties: special adaptations of individu-
als to live in a society or social scaffolding that shapes the interactions between individuals. 
Adaptations for social behaviour in the form of mechanisms loosely inspired by the Theory 
of Mind (and following the Rational Speech Act framework (Frank and Goodman 2012)) 
are included in some models of emergent communication (Batali 1998; Jaques et al. 2019; 
Bard et al. 2020). These mechanisms use agents’ internal cognitive modules to explicitly 
predict the behaviour of another agent. This basic schema can be studied with only two 
agents present. While introducing such mechanisms does not lift the meaning-mapping 
assumption, it makes the mapping truly bi-directional, as signal production includes the 
consideration of signal interpretation.
1 3
65 Page 30 of 40

===PDF PAGE 31===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Furthermore, social structures, such as social networks (Baronchelli et al. 2006; Zubek 
et al. 2017), social ecology (Loula et al. 2010), and kinship structures (Floreano et al. 2007; 
Mitri et al. 2009), have also been demonstrated to be significant in shaping emerging sig -
nals. These effects can only be investigated within a larger population comprising diverse 
agents.9 It is crucial to consider individual differences among the agents, as these variations 
introduce ambiguity in communication and differentiate the games the agents play. Particu-
lar types of social network topology might make the whole system more susceptible to ran-
dom fluctuations (Raviv et al. 2020). The experiments by Floreano et al. (2007) suggest that 
it is evolutionary advantageous to disclose certain pieces of information with related agents 
while concealing this information from unrelated agents. More intricate social interactions 
are necessary to incorporate varied functions of communication contingent upon social rela-
tions and scaffold the emergence of symbols from continuous actions (Rączaszek-Leonardi 
2016; Rączaszek-Leonardi et al. 2018).
5.8 Historicity of interactions
As with all complex evolving phenomena, natural languages bear the mark of their long 
history of evolution. The current shape of the communication system may reflect preadapta-
tions to past evolutionary pressures which are no longer present. At the level of individual 
language learning, there is a historical trajectory of language development that undergoes 
different stages. Historicity understood in this way is explored only by a couple of models 
of emergent communication. The paradigm of iterated learning Kirby et al. ( 2014), which 
models vertical language transmission, taps into some aspects of historicity and the infor -
mation bottleneck associated with it. In Schulz et al. ( 2012), language games were played 
in a certain order, and the terms grounded using previous games were used in subsequent 
games. In other research, Zubek et al. (2017) studied the reactions of a population of agents 
to a certain trajectory of changes in the environment and demonstrated that the structure of 
language categories is affected by history. Korbak et al. (2021) presented a developmentally 
motivated model in which an agent undergoes two stages of learning, which helps it develop 
a compositional language. We view this form of historicity as necessary for language to 
move away from a simple description of what is present in the environment and become 
more abstract, relaxing the assumptions of the descriptive function of communication and 
meaning-mapping.
6 Strongly embodied models combine multiple sources of complexity
As seen in the previous section, there are multiple sources of structure in emerging com -
munication protocols. While some of them can be explored independently to answer specific 
questions and disentangle relative influences of different factors, we expect that specific 
properties of symbolic communication may arise as emergent effects of a combination of 
multiple factors (Rączaszek-Leonardi and Deacon 2018). Thus, models targeting the emer-
gence of symbols should avoid over-simplifications that prevent these factors from inter -
acting, as this in turn may prevent the emergence of certain phenomena. Of course, it is 
9 We can talk about a population only when agents truly differ. This is precluded by models that use direct 
neural network weight sharing between agents, as in Mordatch and Abbeel (2018).
1 3
Page 31 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 32===
J. Zubek et al.
infeasible and impractical to build a model that is realistic in every possible dimension; 
models are only useful as abstractions of reality (Ohmer and Cuskley 2023). We observe 
that a certain strain of embodied simulations naturally combines multiple sources of com -
munication complexity.
First, we must specify what we mean by “embodied simulations”. Often, any model or 
theory that considers an influence of bodily factors on cognition is labelled as “embodied”. 
However, from the perspective of ecological psychology, this is a misconception (Wilson 
and Golonka 2013). “Embodiment”, in a stronger sense, means that cognition is no longer 
realised by the agent alone but by the relations between the agent and the environment. The 
environment has to be sufficiently rich and endowed with its own dynamics. Embodied 
agents’ actions are always situated within some ecological context and impact the environ-
ment; in turn, the environment provides feedback for the agent. Calls for the ecological 
realism of the simulations must not be conflated with biological realism. Simulations are 
typically considered biologically realistic when parts of agents’ cognitive architecture are 
inspired by the brain’s anatomy or replicate functions attributed to human cognition (such 
as the Theory of Mind module). From our perspective, ecological realism consisting of suf-
ficiently complex interactions with the environment is at least equally important. Quoting 
Mace (2017), “ask not what’s in your head, but what your head is inside of”. Agents together 
with their environment form complex dynamic systems and should be modelled as such 
(Castro 2019).
Simulations have already used simple agents in rich environments, which combine mul-
tiple sources of communication complexity and relax at least some of the three assumptions 
concerning communication emergence modelling identified in Sect. 4. For instance, in Flo-
reano et al.’s (2007), physical space constraints (the inability of multiple robots to occupy 
the same spot) affected the socio-ecological function of communication. In this work, the 
robots had to locate and attach themselves to a food source, but the limited space allowed a 
limited number of robots to feed simultaneously. Thus, communicating the location of food 
posed the risk that another agent would exploit the scarce resource. This implicit cost of 
communication, depending on the evolutionary selection mechanisms, resulted in various 
communication strategies, from honest signalling to deceptive communication (Mitri et al. 
2009). In some cases, the robots also learnt to exploit the physical properties of the medium 
of communication, as they hid emitted light signals from the other robots by hiding behind 
the food source (Lehman et al. 2018). This is an example of signalling-dependent emergent 
behaviour, which could not evolve in a simpler environment and demonstrates the complex 
bidirectional relation between signalling, behaviour, and the environment. The role of sig -
nals in these simulations goes beyond simply referring to objects or actions and involves 
guiding actions in the continuous environment (lifting the meaning-mapping assumption).
The environment adopted by Grouchy et al. (2016) was minimalistic in that it was devoid 
of any objects apart from the agents. Still, the agents were situated in the sense that they 
could freely move in a continuous space and use their own locations as a context for com -
munication. Importantly, the emitted signals were continuous and interpreted as such (lift -
ing the assumption about preexisting discrete signs). The continuity of signals opened new 
possibilities for meaning emergence, as the signal intensity could convey information on the 
distance in space (basic iconic form of significance). What emerged was not a static signal-
referent mapping, which can be used to interpret only previously encountered signals, but 
a dynamical structure using signals to control agent actions allowing for generalisation. 
1 3
65 Page 32 of 40

===PDF PAGE 33===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Ultimately, this led to a dialogical form of communication by which the signals of both 
agents became entangled. We view the direction of simulating situated dialogue in a dynam-
ical environment as potentially fruitful, as it enables functional communication to emerge 
with no obvious information asymmetry between the sender and receiver or straightforward 
descriptive interpretation (Bancerek and Zubek 2023) (lifting the assumption about com -
munication function).
Situatedness is also naturally connected with aspects of perceptual and sensorimotor 
grounding. It has been shown that situating agents in more complex environments benefits 
systematic generalisation. Although they did not directly address the problem of language 
emergence, Hill et al. (2020) presented a model in which they studied the effects of embodi-
ment on language comprehension. Their agent had to navigate through the environment 
and perform actions according to the instructions given as a sentence in natural language. 
They demonstrated that (i) egocentric perspective (as opposed to third-person view), (ii) 
3D simulated environments (as opposed to 2D grid worlds), and (iii) active perception (as 
opposed to perceiving the stimuli statically) incentivised the agent to factorise experience 
and behaviours into pragmatically motivated reusable chunks, leading to better generalisa -
tion as shown in experiments isolating factors (i)–(iii).
These results explain previous results showing a low systematic generalisation in recur -
rent neural networks trained on symbolically encoded stimuli from a single modality (Lake 
and Baroni 2017). Hill et al. (2020) hypothesised that this effect arises because richer expe-
rience is a form of implicit data augmentation. This result suggests that the human capacity 
to exploit the structure of the world, when learning to generalise in systematic ways, could 
be replicated in artificial neural networks if such networks are given access to a rich, interac-
tive, multimodal stream of stimuli that adequately matches the experience of an embodied 
human learner (Bisk et al. 2020).
Strongly embodied models simultaneously integrate multiple sources of communicative 
complexity and alleviate the three identified assumptions commonly found in communica -
tion emergence models. We believe that by pursuing this approach and constructing simula-
tions incorporating non-trivial agent-environment relations, yet maintaining simplicity for 
the sake of analysis, we can provide a more accurate portrayal of the initial challenges 
faced by ecological communication systems before they evolve into more abstract and sym-
bolic forms. Strongly embodied simulations facilitate modelling iconic signs, whose form 
resemble the structure of actions they control, or indexical signs, which are meaningfully 
embedded within dynamic streams of events (Deacon 1997; Hutchins and Johnson 2009). 
Incorporating icons and indices as basic classes of signs would open up possibilities for 
modelling the emergence of symbolic signs following the “ungrounding” path, wherein 
signs gain symbolic properties gradually as they become less reliant on their immediate con-
text and more dependent on systematic sign-sign relations (Rączaszek-Leonardi and Dea -
con 2018). Placing an agent within a complex ecology that encompasses not only physical 
environment interactions but also intricate social dynamics may promote the development 
of properly symbolic communication systems (Rączaszek-Leonardi et al. 2018).
1 3
Page 33 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 34===
J. Zubek et al.
7 Conclusion
Models of communication emergence come from multiple traditions, which explains the 
differences in terminology and emphasis. The lack of a systematic understanding of the 
assumptions underlying various models creates a barrier preventing researchers from one 
domain from using the theoretical insights developed in other domains. We hope that our 
review will help build a systematic understanding.
As our analysis clarifies, many pressures shape communication signs and symbols, and 
building a model means bracketing some of them out. Sometimes, however, the bracketing 
process is too heavy and too hasty, and it may remove the vital elements of the explanation. 
Perhaps the fascination with one particular kind of language game involving a sender, a 
receiver, and clearly distinguished referents made us forget that people play many different 
games (Berne 1964). We propose a change to a dynamic perspective that advocates embod-
ied and situated models, allows the historicity of communication systems to be recognised, 
and does not presuppose the existence of readily distinguishable symbols. This perspective 
extends the role of language from describing the world to controlling interactions. We have 
systematically argued that the mapping metaphor cannot adequately explain the meaning 
and role of language and should thus not form the foundation of communication emergence 
models. Instead, models in which meaning emerges through interactions of situated agents 
in an ecological niche could take on a more central role.
Author contributions JZ, TK, and JRL contributed to the conception, writing and editing of the manuscript.
Funding This work was funded by the National Science Centre, Poland (OPUS 15 grant, 2018/29/B/
HS1/00884). The funding source had no role in the data collection or manuscript preparation processes.
Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Andreas J (2019) Measuring compositionality in representation learning. International conference on learn -
ing representations
Baddeley A (2003) Working memory and language: an overview. J Commun Disorders 36(3):189–208
Bancerek M, Zubek J (2023) The emergence of coordinative dialogue-pragmatic context in multi-agent com-
munication. Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society (V ol. 45)
Bard N, Foerster JN, Chandar S, Burch N, Lanctot M, Song HF, Parisotto E, Dumoulin V , Moitra S, Hughes 
E, Dunning I, Mourad S, Larochelle H, Bellemare MG, Bowling M (2020) The Hanabi challenge: a new 
frontier for AI research. Artif Intell 280:103216
1 3
65 Page 34 of 40

===PDF PAGE 35===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Baronchelli A, Dall’Asta L, Barrat A, Loreto V (2006) Topology-induced coarsening in language games. 
Phys Rev E: Statis Phys Plasmas Fluids Related Interdiscip Topics 73(1):015102
Baronchelli A, Loreto V , Puglisi A (2015) Individual biases, cultural evolution, and the statistical nature of 
language universals: the case of colour naming systems. PLOS ONE 10(5):e0125019
Barrett JA, Skyrms B (2017) Self-assembling games. Br J Philos Sci 68(2):329–353
Barrett JA, Skyrms B, Cochran C (2018) Hierarchical models for the evolution of compositional language. 
PhilSci
Barrett JA, Skyrms B, Mohseni A (2019) Self-assembling networks. Br J Philos Sci 70(1):301–325
 Batali, J (1998). Computational Simulations of the Emergence of Grammar. J. Hurford, C. Knight & M. 
Studdert-Kennedy (Eds.), Approaches to the Evolution of Language: Social and Cognitive bases (pp. 
405–426). Cambridge University Press.
Beecher MD (2021) Why are no animal communication systems simple languages? Front Psychol 12:602635
Berne E (1964) Games people play: the psychology of human relationships. Grove Press, New York
Bisk Y , Holtzman A, Thomason J, Andreas J, Bengio Y , Chai J, Lapata M, Lazaridou A, May J, Nisnevich A, 
Pinto N, Turian J (2020) Experience grounds language. B. Webber, T. Cohn, Y . He, and Y . Liu (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) 
(pp. 8718–8735). Online: Association for Computational Linguistics
Bogin B, Geva M, Berant J (2019) Emergence of communication in an interactive world with consistent 
speakers (No. arXiv:1809.00549). arXiv
Boldt B, Mortensen DR (2024) A review of the applications of deep learning-based emergent communica -
tion. Transactions on Machine Learning Research
Bouchacourt D, Baroni M (2018) How agents see things: On visual representations in an emergent language 
game. Riloff E, Chiang D, Hockenmaier J, Tsujii J (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 conference on 
empirical methods in natural language processing (pp. 981–985). Brussels, Belgium
Brandizzi N (2023) Toward more human-like AI communication: a review of emergent communication 
research. IEEE Access 11:142317–142340. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3339656
Brighton H (2002) Compositional syntax from cultural transmission. Artif Life 8(1):25–54
Brighton H, Kirby S, Smith K (2005a) Cultural selection for learnability: three principles underlying the view 
that language adapts to be learnable. In: Brighton H, Kirby S, Smith K, Tallerman M (eds) Language 
origins: perspectives on evolution. Oxford University Press, Brussels, pp 291–309
Brighton H, Smith K, Kirby S (2005b) Language as an evolutionary system. Phys Life Rev 2(3):177–226
Cangelosi A (1999) Modeling the evolution of communication: from stimulus associations to grounded sym-
bolic associations. In: Goos G, Hartmanis J, van Leeuwen J, Floreano D, Nicoud J-D, Mondada F (eds) 
Advances in artificial life, vol 1674. Springer, Berlin, pp 654–663
Cangelosi A (2001) Evolution of communication and language using signals, symbols, and words. IEEE 
Trans Evol Comput 5(2):93–101
Cangelosi A, Greco A, Harnad S (2002) Symbol grounding and the symbolic theft hypothesis. In: Cangelosi 
A, Parisi D (eds) Simulating the evolution of language. Springer, London, pp 191–210
Castro R (2019) Open research problems: systems dynamics, complex systems. In: Zeigler BP, Muzy A, Kof-
man E (eds) Theory of modeling and simulation. Academic Press, Cambridge
Centola D, Baronchelli A (2015) The spontaneous emergence of conventions: an experimental study of cul-
tural evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci 112(7):1989–1994
Chaabouni R, Kharitonov E, Bouchacourt D, Dupoux E, Baroni M (2020) Compositionality and generaliza-
tion in emergent languages. Jurafsky D, Chai J, Schluter N, Tetreault J (Eds.), Proceedings of the 58th 
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (pp. 4427–4442). Online
Chaabouni R, Strub F, Altché F, Tarassov E, Tallec C, Davoodi E, Mathewson KW, Tieleman O, Lazaridou A, 
Piot B (2022) Emergent communication at scale. International conference on learning representations
Choi E, Lazaridou A, de Freitas N (2018) Compositional obverter communication learning from raw visual 
input (No. arXiv:1804.02341). arXiv
Christiansen MH, Chater N (2022) The language game: how improvisation created language and changed the 
world. Basic Books, New York
Cissewski J, Luncz LV (2021) Symbolic signal use in wild chimpanzee gestural communication?: a theoreti-
cal framework. Front Psychol 12:718414
Cogswell M, Lu J, Lee S, Parikh D, Batra D (2020) Emergence of compositional language with deep genera-
tional transmission (No. arXiv:1904.09067). arXiv
Correia JPFeV (2020) Meaningful play: signaling games in light of later Wittgenstein (Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation). Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
Dale R, Lupyan G (2012) Understanding the origins of morphological diversity: the linguistic niche hypoth-
esis. Adv Complex Syst 15:1150017
de Boer B (2001) The origins of vowel systems. Oxford University Press, Oxford
1 3
Page 35 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 36===
J. Zubek et al.
De Boer B, Zuidema W (2010) Multi-agent simulations of the evolution of combinatorial phonology. Adap-
tive Behav 18(2):141–154
Deacon TW (1997) The symbolic species. Norton, New York
Deacon TW (2011a) Incomplete nature: how mind emerged from matter. Norton, New York
Deacon TW (2011b) The symbol concept. In: Gibson KR, Tallerman M (eds) The oxford handbook of lan -
guage evolution. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Di Paolo E (1997) An investigation into the evolution of communication. Adaptive Behav 6(2):285–324
Di Paolo E, Cuffari EC, De Jaegher H (2018) Linguistic bodies: the continuity between life and language. 
The MIT Press, Cambridge
Dingemanse M, Roberts SG, Baranova J, Blythe J, Drew P, Floyd S, Gisladottir RS, Kendrick KH, Levinson 
SC, Manrique E, Rossi G, Enfield NJ (2015) Universal principles in the repair of communication prob-
lems. PLOS ONE 10:1–15
Dingemanse M, Liesenfeld A, Rasenberg M, Albert S, Ameka FK, Birhane A, Bolis D, Cassell J, Clift R, Cuf-
fari E, De Jaegher H, Novaes CD, Enfield NJ, Fusaroli R, Gregoromichelaki E, Hutchins E, Konvalinka 
I, Milton D, Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Reddy V , Rossano F, Schlangen D, Seibt J, Stokoe E, Suchman L, 
Vesper C, Wheatley T, Wiltschko M (2023) Beyond single-mindedness: a figure-ground reversal for the 
cognitive sciences. Cognit Sci 47(1):e13230
Doshi-Velez F, Kim B (2017) Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning (No. 
arXiv:1702.08608). arXiv
Elman JL (1993) Learning and development in neural networks: the importance of starting small. Cognition 
48(1):71–99
Evtimova K, Drozdov A, Kiela D, Cho K (2018) Emergent communication in a multi-modal, multi-step 
referential game. International conference on learning representations. Vancouver
Feldman J (2012) Symbolic representation of probabilistic worlds. Cognition 123(1):61–83
Ferri F, D’Ulizia A, Grifoni P (2018) Computational models of language evolution: challenges and future 
perspectives. J Univ Comput Sci 24:1345–1377
Floreano D, Mitri S, Magnenat S, Keller L (2007) Evolutionary conditions for the emergence of communica-
tion in robots. Curr Biol 17(6):514–519
Floridi L (2010) Semantic information. In: Floridi L (ed) Information: very short introduction. Oxford Uni -
versity Press, Oxford, pp 48–59
Frank MC, Goodman Noah D (2012) Predicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science 
336(6084):998–998
Funkhouser E (2017) Beliefs as signals: a new function for belief. Philos Psychol 30(6):809–831
Galke L, Raviv L (2024) Emergent communication and learning pressures in language models: a language 
evolution perspective (No. arXiv:2403.14427). arXiv
Gärdenfors P (2004) Conceptual spaces: the geometry of thought. MIT Press, Cambridge
Geffen Lan N, Chemla E, Steinert-Threlkeld S (2020) On the Spontaneous Emergence of Discrete and Com-
positional Signals. Jurafsky D, Chai J, Schluter N, Tetreault J (Eds.), Proceedings of the 58th annual 
meeting of the association for computational linguistics (pp. 4794–4800). Online: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics
Gibson JJ (1966) The Senses considered as perceptual systems. Houghton Mifflin
Gregoromichelaki E, Kempson R (2019) Procedural syntax. In: Scott K, Clark B, Carston R (eds) Relevance, 
pragmatics and interpretation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 187–202
Grice HP (1975) Logic and conversation. Syntax Semant 3:41–58
Grifoni P, D’Ulizia A, Ferri F (2016) Computational methods and grammars in language evolution: a survey. 
Artif Intell Rev 45(3):369–403
Grouchy P, D’Eleuterio GMT, Christiansen MH, Lipson H (2016) On the evolutionary origin of symbolic 
communication. Sci Rep 6(1):34615
Gurnee W, Tegmark M (2024) Language models represent space and time (No. arXiv:2310.02207). arXiv
Hahn M (2020) Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Trans Assoc Comput 
Linguist 8:156–171
Harnad S (1990) The symbol grounding problem. Phys D: Nonlinear Phenom 42(1):335–346
Harnad S (2024) Language writ large: Llms, chatgpt, grounding, meaning and understanding. 
arXiv:2402.02243
Hazlehurst B, Hutchins E (1998) The emergence of propositions from the co-ordination of talk and action in 
a shared world. Lang Cognit Proc 13(2–3):373–424
Hill F, Lampinen A, Schneider R, Clark S, Botvinick M, McClelland JL, Santoro A (2020) Environmental 
drivers of systematicity and generalization in a situated agent. International conference on learning 
representations
Hoang NL, Taniguchi T, Hagiwara Y , Taniguchi A (2024) Emergent communication of multimodal deep 
generative models based on Metropolis-Hastings naming game. Front Robot AI 10:1290604
1 3
65 Page 36 of 40

===PDF PAGE 37===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8)
Huh M, Cheung B, Wang T, Isola P (2024) Position: the platonic representation hypothesis. Salakhutdinov 
R et al (Eds.), Proceedings of the 41st international conference on machine learning (V ol. 235, pp. 
20617–20642). PMLR. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/huh24a. h tml
Hutchins E, Johnson CM (2009) Modeling the emergence of language as an embodied collective cognitive 
activity. Topics Cognit Sci 1(3):523–546
Jaques N, Lazaridou A, Hughes E, Gulcehre C, Ortega PA, Strouse DJ, Leibo JZ, de Freitas N (2019) Social 
influence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. International conference 
on machine learning
Karpathy A, Fei-Fei L (2017) Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descriptions. IEEE 
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 39(4):664–676
Kempson R, Meyer-Viol W, Gabbay DM (2000) Dynamic syntax: the flow of language understanding. 
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford
Kirby S (2001) Spontaneous evolution of linguistic structure-an iterated learning model of the emergence of 
regularity and irregularity. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 5(2):102–110
Kirby S, Cornish H, Smith K (2008) Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: an experimental 
approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proc Natl Acad Sci 105(31):10681–10686
Kirby S, Griffiths T, Smith K (2014) Iterated learning and the evolution of language. Curr Opinion Neurobiol 
28:108–114
Kirby S, Tamariz M, Cornish H, Smith K (2015) Compression and communication in the cultural evolution 
of linguistic structure. Cognition 141:87–102
Korbak T, Zubek J, Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2020) Measuring non-trivial compositionality in emergent com -
munication. (No. arXiv:2010.15058). arXiv
Korbak T, Zubek J, Kuciński Ł, Miłoś P, Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2021) Interaction history as a source of 
compositionality in emergent communication. Interaction Studies 22(2):212–243
Kottur S, Moura JMF, Lee S, Batra D (2017) Natural language does not emerge ‘naturally’ in multi-agent 
dialog. Conference on empirical methods in natural language processing
Kuciński Ł, Korbak T, Kołodziej P, Miłoś P (2021) Catalytic role of noise and necessity of inductive biases 
in the emergence of compositional communication. Adv Neural Inform Proc Syst 34:23075–23088
LaCroix T (2022) Using Logic to Evolve More Logic: Composing Logical Operators via Self-Assembly. The 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 73(2):407–437
Lake B, Baroni M (2017) Generalization without Systematicity: On the Compositional Skills of Sequence-to-
Sequence Recurrent Networks. International Conference on Machine Learning
Lazaridou A, Baroni M (2020) Emergent Multi-Agent Communication in the Deep Learning Era (No. 
arXiv:2006.02419). arXiv
Lazaridou A, Peysakhovich A, Baroni M (2017) Multi-agent cooperation and the emergence of (natural) 
language. International conference on learning representations
Lazaridou A, Hermann KM, Tuyls K, Clark S (2018) Emergence of Linguistic Communication from Refer-
ential Games with Symbolic and Pixel Input (No. arXiv:1804.03984). arXiv
Lazaridou A, Potapenko A, Tieleman O (2020) Multi-agent communication meets natural language: syner -
gies between functional and structural language learning
LeCun Y , Boser B, Denker JS, Henderson D, Howard RE, Hubbard W, Jackel LD (1989) Backpropagation 
applied to handwritten zip code recognition. Neural Comput 1(4):541–551
Lee J, Cho K, Weston J, Kiela D (2018) Emergent translation in multi-agent communication (No. 
arXiv:1710.06922). arXiv
Lehman J, Clune J, Misevic D (2018) The surprising creativity of digital evolution. ALIFE 2018: The 2018 
conference on artificial life (pp. 55–56). MIT Press
Lewis DK (1969) Convention: a philosophical study. Wiley, Cambridge
Li F, Bowling M (2019) Ease-of-teaching and language structure from emergent communication. Wallach H, 
Larochelle H, Beygelzimer A, dAlché-Buc F, Fox E, Garnett R (Eds.), Advances in neural information 
processing systems (V ol. 32). Curran Associates, Inc
Lieck R, Rohrmeier M (2021) Discretisation and continuity: the emergence of symbols in communication. 
Cognition 215:104787
Lindblom B, Macneilage P, Studdert-Kennedy M (1984) Self-organizing processes and the explanation of 
phonological universals. In: Butterworth B, Comrie B, Dahl Ö (eds) Explanations for language univer-
sals. Mouton, Berlin, pp 181–203
Lipowska D, Lipowski A (2022) Emergence and evolution of language in multi-agent systems. Lingua. Int 
Rev General Linguist. Revue internationale de linguistique générale 272:103331
1 3
Page 37 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 38===
J. Zubek et al.
Liszka JJ, Battistella E, Haley M (2006) Linguistics and semiotics ii: C. s. peirce’s influence on 20th-century 
linguistics. In: Auroux S, Koerner EFK, Niederehe H-J, Versteegh K (eds) An international handbook 
on the evolution of the study of language from the beginnings to the present. De Gruyter Mouton, 
Berlin, pp 2589–2599
Liu H, Li C, Wu Q, Lee YJ (2023) Visual instruction tuning. arXiv:2304.08485
Loula A, Gudwin R, El-Hani CN, Queiroz J (2010) Emergence of self-organized symbol-based communica-
tion in artificial creatures. Cognit Syst Res 11(2):131–147
Lyon C, Nehaniv CL, Saunders J, Belpaeme T, Bisio A, Fischer K, Förster F, Lehmann H, Metta G, Mohan 
V , Morse A, Nolfi S, Nori F, Rohlfing K, Sciutti A, Tani J, Tuci E, Wrede B, Zeschel A, Cangelosi A 
(2016) Embodied language learning and cognitive bootstrapping: methods and design principles. Int J 
Adv Robot Syst 13(3):105
Mace W (2017) James Gibson’s strategy for perceiving: ask not what’s in your head, but what your head is 
inside of. In: Shaw R, Bransford J (eds) Perceiving, acting and knowing: toward an ecological psychol-
ogy. Routledge, London, pp 43–65
Marks S, Tegmark M (2024) The geometry of truth: emergent linear structure in large language model repre-
sentations of true/false datasets (No. arXiv:2310.06824). arXiv
Marocco D, Nolfi S (2007) Emergence of communication in embodied agents evolved for the ability to solve 
a collective navigation problem. Connect Sci 19(1):53–74
Milford M, Wyeth G (2010) Persistent navigation and mapping using a biologically inspired SLAM system. 
Int J Robot Res 29(9):1131–1153
Mitri S, Floreano D, Keller L (2009) The evolution of information suppression in communicating robots with 
conflicting interests. Proc Natl Acad Sci 106(37):15786–15790
Mordatch I, Abbeel P (2018) Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent populations. 
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (V ol. 32)
Mostafazadeh N, Brockett C, Dolan B, Galley M, Gao J, Spithourakis GP, Vanderwende L (2017) Image-
grounded conversations: multimodal context for natural question and response generation (No. 
arXiv:1701.08251). arXiv
Mu J, Goodman N (2021) Emergent communication of generalizations. Adv Neural Inform Proc Syst 
34:17994–18007
Nowak MA, Krakauer DC (1999) The evolution of language. Proc Natl Acad Sci 96(14):8028–8033
Ohmer X, Cuskley C (2023) Communication games: modeling language evolution through dyadic agent 
interactions. OSF
Ohmer X, Marino M, Franke M, König P (2022) Mutual influence between language and perception in multi-
agent communication games. PLoS Comput Biol 18(10):e1010658
Oliphant M, Batali J (1997) Learning and the emergence of coordinated communication. Center Res Lang 
Newsl 11(1):1–46
Olney AM (2013) Symbolic, indexical, and iconic communication with domestic dogs. HUMANA.MENTE 
J Philos Studies 6(24):79–98
Oudeyer P-Y (2005) From holistic to discrete speech sounds: the blind snowflake-maker hypothesis. In: Tall-
erman M (ed) Language origins: perspectives on evolution. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Parisi D, Antinucci F, Natale F, Cecconi F (2008) Simulating the expansion of farming and the differentia -
tion of European languages. In: Laks B, Serge Cleuziou J-P, Encreve P (eds) Origin and evolution of 
languages: approaches, models, paradigms. London, Equinox
Pattee H (1969) How does a molecule become a message. Dev Biol Suppl 3:1–16
Pattee H (1982) Cell psychology: an evolutionary approach to the symbol-matter problem. Cognit Brain 
Theory 5(4):325–341
Peirce CS (1903) Syllabus: syllabus of a course of lectures at the Lowell Institute beginning 1903, Nov. 23. 
On Some Topics of Logic. MS [R] 478
Peng Z, Wang W, Dong L, Hao Y , Huang S, Ma S, Wei F (2023) Kosmos-2: grounding multimodal large 
language models to the world. arXiv:2306.14824
Peters J, de Puiseau CW, Tercan H, Gopikrishnan A, Carvalho GALD, Bitter C, Meisen T (2024) A survey on 
emergent language (No. arXiv:2409.02645). arXiv
Quine WV (1936) Truth by convention. Philosophical essays for Alfred North Whitehead (pp. 90–124). 
London: Longmans, Green & Co
Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2003) The interrelation of time scales in a description of language. Views V oices 
1(2):93–108
Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2009) Metodologiczne podstawy współczesnej psycholingwistyki. In: Stalmaszc -
zyk P (ed) Metodologie językoznawstwa. Współczesne tendencje i kontrowersje. Lexis, Kraków, pp 
236–251
Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2016) How does a word become a message? An illustration on a developmental time-
scale. New Ideas Psychol 42:46–55
1 3
65 Page 38 of 40

===PDF PAGE 39===
Models of symbol emergence in communication: a conceptual review…
Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2024) What dynamic approaches have taught us about cognition and what they have 
not: on values in motion and the importance of replicable forms. Topics Cognit Sci.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 
1 1 1 1 / t o p s . 1 2 7 0 9       
Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Kelso JS (2008) Reconciling symbolic and dynamic aspects of language: toward a 
dynamic psycholinguistics. New Ideas Psychol 26(2):193–207
Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Dębska A, Sochanowicz A (2014) Pooling the ground: understanding and coordina -
tion in collective sense making. Front Psychol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01233
Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Deacon TW (2018) Ungrounding symbols in language development: implications 
for modeling emergent symbolic communication in artificial systems. 2018 Joint IEEE 8th interna -
tional conference on development and learning and epigenetic robotics (ICDL-EpiRob) (pp. 232–237). 
Tokyo: IEEE
Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Nomikou I, Rohlfing KJ, Deacon TW (2018) Language development from an ecologi-
cal perspective: ecologically valid ways to abstract symbols. Ecol Psychol 30(1):39–73
Raviv L, Meyer A, Lev-Ari S (2020) The role of social network structure in the emergence of linguistic 
structure. Cognit Sci 44(8):e12876
Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Zubek J (2023) Is love an abstract concept? A view of concepts from an interaction-
based perspective. Philos Trans Royal Soc B 378(1870):20210356
Ren Y , Guo S, Labeau M, Cohen SB, Kirby S (2020) Compositional languages emerge in a neural iterated 
learning model. International conference on learning representations
Rohlfing KJ, Wrede B, V ollmer A-L, Oudeyer P-Y (2016) An alternative to mapping a word onto a concept 
in language acquisition: pragmatic frames. Front Psychol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00470
Rorot W, Rączaszek-Leonardi J (2023) Understanding “Compositionality” in research on language emer -
gence. Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society (V ol. 45)
Savage-Rumbaugh ES, Rumbaugh DM (1978) Symbolization, language, and chimpanzees: a theoretical 
reevaluation based on initial language acquisition processes in four young Pan troglodytes. Brain Lang 
6(3):265–300
Savage-Rumbaugh ES, Rumbaugh DM, Smith ST, Lawson J (1980) Reference: the linguistic essential. Sci-
ence 210(4472):922–925
Schulz R, Wyeth G, Wiles J (2012) Beyond here-and-now: extending shared physical experiences to shared 
conceptual experiences. Adapt Behav 20(5):360–387
Seuren P (1998) Western linguistics: an historical introduction. Wiley, Hoboken
Shannon CE (1948) A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst Tech J 27(3):379–423
Skyrms B (2010) Signals: evolution, learning, and information. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Smith K, Kirby S, Brighton H (2003) Iterated learning: a framework for the emergence of language. Artif 
Life 9(4):371–386
Spence M (1973) Job market signaling. Quarterly J Econ 87(3):355–374
Spike M, Stadler K, Kirby S, Smith K (2017) Minimal requirements for the emergence of learned signaling. 
Cognit Sci 41(3):623–658
Spranger M (2016) The evolution of grounded spatial language. Language Science Press, Berlin
Steels L (2015) The Talking Heads experiment: origins of words and meanings. Language Science Press, 
Berlin
Steels L, Belpaeme T (2005) Coordinating perceptually grounded categories through language: a case study 
for colour. Behav Brain Sci 28(4):469–489
Steinert-Threlkeld S (2020) Toward the emergence of nontrivial compositionality. Philos Sci 87(5):897–909
Taniguchi T (2024) Collective predictive coding hypothesis: symbol emergence as decentralized bayesian 
inference. Front Robot A I:11. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2024.1353870
Taniguchi T, Nagai T, Nakamura T, Iwahashi N, Ogata T, Asoh H (2016) Symbol emergence in robotics: a 
survey. Adv Robot 30(11–12):706–728. https://doi .org/10.108 0/01691864. 2016.116 4622
Taniguchi T, Ugur E, Hoffmann M, Jamone L, Nagai T, Rosman B, Matsuka T, Iwahashi N, Oztop E, Piater 
J, Wörgötter F (2019) Symbol emergence in cognitive developmental systems: a survey. IEEE Trans 
Cognit Dev Syst 11(4):494–516. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCDS.2018.2867772
Taniguchi T, Yoshida Y , Matsui Y , Le Hoang N, Taniguchi A, Hagiwara Y (2023) Emergent communication 
through metropolis-hastings naming game with deep generative models. Adv Robot 37(19):1266–1282. 
https:   //d oi. or g/10 .1080/01 6918 64.20 23.2260856
Tognoli E, Zhang M, Fuchs A, Beetle C, Kelso JAS (2020) Coordination dynamics: a foundation for under-
standing social behavior. Front Human Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.00317
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser Ł, Polosukhin I (2017) Atten -
tion is all you need. Proceedings of the 31st international conference on neural information processing 
systems (pp. 6000–6010). Red Hook, NY , USA: Curran Associates Inc
V ogt P (2009) Modeling interactions between language evolution and demography. Human Biol 
81(2–3):237–258
1 3
Page 39 of 40 65

===PDF PAGE 40===
J. Zubek et al.
Wacewicz S, Żywiczyński P (2018) Language origins: fitness consequences, platform of trust, cooperation, 
and turn-taking. Interaction Studies 19(1–2):167–182
Wang S, Steinert-Threlkeld S (2023) Evaluating transformer’s ability to learn mildly context-sensitive lan -
guages. Belinkov Y , Hao S, Jumelet J, Kim N, McCarthy A, Mohebbi H (Eds.) Proceedings of the 6th 
BlackboxNLP workshop: analyzing and interpreting neural networks for NLP (pp. 271–283). Singa -
pore: Association for Computational Linguistics
Weaver W (1949) Recent contributions to the mathematical theory of communication. The mathematical 
theory of communication. University of Illinois Press: Champaign
Wilson AD, Golonka S (2013) Embodied cognition is not what you think it is. Front Psychol.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g 
/ 1 0 . 3 3 8 9 / f p s y g . 2 0 1 3 . 0 0 0 5 8       
Wittgenstein L (1953) Philosophical investigations. Basil Blackwell, Oxford
Wolpert D (1996) The lack of a priori distinctions between learning algorithms. Neural Comput 8:1341–1390
Wrede B, Rohlfing KJ, Hanheide M, Sagerer G (2009) Towards learning by interacting. In: Sendhoff B, 
Körner E, Sporns O, Ritter H, Doya K (eds) Creating brain-like intelligence: from basic principles to 
complex intelligent systems. Springer, Berlin, pp 139–150
Zubek J, Denkiewicz M, Barański J, Wróblewski P, Rączaszek-Leonardi J, Plewczynski D (2017) Social 
adaptation in multi-agent model of linguistic categorization is affected by network information flow. 
PLOS ONE 12(8):e0182490
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
65 Page 40 of 40