
===PDF PAGE 1===
1
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
www.nature.com/scientificreports
On The Evolutionary Origin of 
Symbolic Communication
Paul Grouchy1,2, Gabriele M. T. D’Eleuterio1, Morten H. Christiansen2 & Hod Lipson2,3
The emergence of symbolic communication is often cited as a critical step in the evolution of Homo 
sapiens, language, and human-level cognition. It is a widely held assumption that humans are the only 
species that possess natural symbolic communication schemes, although a variety of other species 
can be taught to use symbols. The origin of symbolic communication remains a controversial open 
problem, obfuscated by the lack of a fossil record. Here we demonstrate an unbroken evolutionary 
pathway from a population of initially noncommunicating robots to the spontaneous emergence 
of symbolic communication. Robots evolve in a simulated world and are supplied with only a single 
channel of communication. When their ability to reproduce is motivated by the need to find a mate, 
robots evolve indexical communication schemes from initially noncommunicating populations in 99% 
of all experiments. Furthermore, 9% of the populations evolve a symbolic communication scheme 
allowing pairs of robots to exchange information about two independent spatial dimensions over a 
one-dimensional channel, thereby increasing their chance of reproduction. These results suggest that 
the ability for symbolic communication could have emerged spontaneously under natural selection, 
without requiring cognitive preadaptations or preexisting iconic communication schemes as previously 
conjectured.
Communication is commonly defined as an event mediated by the use of signs in which the action of an agent or 
agents (the senders) causes a reaction in one or more agents (the receivers)
1. Animals communicate using iconic 
or indexical signals to refer directly to objects or actions2, although some species can be taught to use symbols3. 
This type of communication is characterized by a one-to-one mapping between the signal and the object or 
action. Iconic communication is mediated by signs (icons) which bear a similarity to the form of objects and are 
immediately recognizable (e.g., as when a monkey opens its mouth and bears its teeth to threaten or when two 
spots on a butterfly’s wings resemble the eyes of a predator) whereas in indexical communication signs (indices) 
are only physically or temporally correlated with objects
2,4. For example, to alert other members in their troop 
of impending danger, vervet monkeys have developed alarm calls directly associated with specific predators or, 
perhaps more likely, to specific fleeing responses5. The vervet monkey alarm calls qualify as indexical, as they do 
not have any physical similarity with the predators to which they refer. If, however, the alarm for an eagle sounded 
like (i.e., physically resembled) the call of an eagle, it would qualify as iconic.
By contrast, humans appear to be the only species to have developed a complex system of signs that interrelate 
with one another. This form of communication—symbolic communication—is based on sign-sign relationships 
rather than the sign-object relationships of iconic or indexical communication. Symbolic communication relies 
on one-to-many mappings between a sign or symbol and that to which it may refer. The meaning of symbols 
depends on a mutually agreed upon cultural context. For example, if one writes “bald eagle, ” we know that we 
are talking about a species of bird of prey. If, however, one writes “eagle eyes, ” we are instead talking about good 
vision. Thus, meaning arises from the sign-sign relationships between “eagle” and the other signs (“bald, ” “eyes”) 
and not from any one sign in particular.
The transition from indexical to symbolic communication is therefore a key evolutionary change because it 
may signal the origin of language
6–8 and symbolic thought2,8,9. This transition has not been observed in nature 
nor has it been reproduced in an artificial evolutionary environment, thus the origin of symbolic communica-
tion remains an open problem
10. Previous works 11–19  have explored the evolution of communication between 
robots using evolutionary algorithms. Such approaches employ discrete generations, where offspring replace the 
entire parent population thus removing the requirement for continuity of an evolving communication scheme 
between generations. Furthermore, these approaches employ experimenter-defined objective functions (used to 
1University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 2Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, USA. 3Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed 
to H.L. (email: hod.lipson@columbia.edu)
received: 14 March 2016
Accepted: 25 August 2016
Published: 10 October 2016
OPEN

===PDF PAGE 2===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
evaluate the reproductive viability of individuals or groups of agents) which can restrict the open-endedness of 
the evolutionary process 20 and can introduce significant levels of experimenter bias 21. These experiments have 
produced a variety of complex communication schemes; however, none has demonstrated the emergence of sym-
bolic communication.
Digital simulation experiments have also been used to explore the emergence of communication. In a sim -
ulated world similar to the one presented here, agents evolved indexical communication using a 3-bit channel. 
Sighted but immobile females used these schemes to direct nearby blind but mobile males to their location on 
a two-dimensional grid 22. Avida23, a software platform for research on digital organisms, has also been used to 
study the emergence of experimenter-defined communication schemes among populations of self-replicating 
computer programs24.
Simulating the emergence of communication
Our evolutionary environment, called NoiseWorld, is illustrated in Fig. 1. The agents inhabiting this discrete-time 
world are represented by evolvable mathematical models25 (EMMs) in the form of a system of expandable differ-
ence equations which describe the state of the agent, its motor function and its communication output. The use of 
EMMs enables a direct analysis of a robot’s behaviour by investigating its governing equations.
The structure of EMMs is given by directed tree graphs (see Supplementary Fig. S1), which serve as the agent’s 
genome, and evolve using the rules of genetic programming25–27. Agent genomes are subject to inheritance and 
mutation. However, no objective fitness function is provided. Two agents sexually reproduce when they are in 
close proximity (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. S2). Thus NoiseWorld evolves asynchronously. Selection 
pressure arises from the fact that higher reproductive rates lead to lower average agent lifespans as each birth is 
accompanied by the random death of a robot. This decrease in average lifespan forces less reproductively viable 
genomes out of the population. There are no objective functions, no discrete generations, and no enforced group 
selection.
Each robot is supplied with a one-dimensional communication channel over which it emits a signal omnidi-
rectionally and receives a signal from its nearest neighbour. Relative robot positions are recalculated after every 
timestep, ensuring that a received signal is always arriving from a robot’s current neighbour. Robots cannot detect 
changes in the identity of their nearest neighbour. Additionally, a third robot has the potential to overhear part 
of the communications between two other robots: In the situation where two robots share a nearest neighbour, 
both robots will receive signals from their common neighbour, however the common neighbour will only receive 
the signal from the robot that is closest to it. Therefore, the closest robot and the common nearest neighbour can 
signal to one another, while the third robot can only “overhear” one half of the conversation between the other 
two robots.
Robots cannot determine the direction from which a signal is received nor is there any variation in the inten-
sity of a signal that might otherwise reveal the relative distance of the sender. Any information extracted by the 
receiver must reside in the content of the signal and not from information inherent in the medium. While the 
robots are equipped with several mechanical preadaptations–in addition to the availability of a communication 
channel, the robots know their location and have motor function–no cognitive preadaptation is provided a priori.
Since robots share the common goal of reproducing, there is no conflict of interest present, and thus no selec-
tion pressure for deceptive communication. Communication schemes that have evolved without a pressure for 
deception have been observed in nature. For example, there is no conflict of interest during the mating displays 
that blue-headed wrasses employ to coordinate the simultaneous release of gametes28.
Figure 1. NoiseW orld. Robots exist in a 2D world and can sense their own x and y locations. They cannot 
sense any information about their neighbours. Robots can produce nondirectional sounds ωout and can detect 
the sounds produced by their nearest neighbour ωin. Robots live on one of the islands in the world, and when 
two robots meet, they automatically produce one offspring. A randomly selected robot dies whenever a new 
offspring robot is born. Islands are organized in a toroid. Offspring robots are occasionally born on one of the 
four neighbouring islands.

===PDF PAGE 3===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
Results
Figure 2 shows a sample history of one simulation run (see Supplementary Fig. S3 for others). Population “snap-
shots” were taken once per era (defined as 100,000 timesteps). As the simulation begins, there is no communi -
cation on the island because an enabled communication channel does not provide any reproductive benefits  
(see Fig. 2c). Moreover, at era 48 for example, ωin, the variable containing a neighbour’s output signal, appears 
nowhere in an agent’s governing equations (see Supplementary Equations S1–S3). Robots cannot respond to 
incoming signals and thus reproduction occurs only by chance. As time progresses, the population’s reproductive 
success improves with the first stepwise increase occurring at about era 50. At this point, initial communication 
emerges; statistically, as measured by the Pearson correlation coefficient, the robot communication output signals 
(ωout) are found to be highly correlated with their latitude (y) as shown in Fig. 2d. Indeed, for an example agent at 
era 313 (see Fig. 2a), the output signal equation (see Supplementary Equations S4 and S5) is
ω =.∆+ y43 6 (1)tt t
out
exhibiting a direct one-to-one relationship. This is indicative of an indexical communication scheme. Just as 
different vervet monkey alarm calls indicate the presence of specific predators, robot ωout values indicate specific 
robot y positions. By era 600, reproduction rates have jumped to a new plateau, whereas the correlation between 
output signal and robot position has dropped precipitously. Agent genomes reveal that the output signals involve 
Figure 2. A sample history of an island is examined and top reproducing robots from two different eras 
are shown interacting. The top frame of these behaviour samples shows the trajectory that the two robots 
take, while the bottom frame shows their communication outputs ωout over time. Auditory interpretations of 
ωout values are provided in Supplementary Audio S1–S2. An era is 100,000 timesteps. (a) By era 313, indexical 
communication has emerged. One can determine directly a robot’s absolute y position at a given timestep from 
its ωout value (y =  ωout/4.36, see text). (b) By era 937, symbolic communication has emerged. Robot position 
information can no longer be determined from observing single ωout values. Instead, relative robot positions are 
revealed through sign-sign relationships (i.e., by observing both agents’ ωout values, see text). (c) Reproduction 
rates are shown with (green) and without (grey) communication enabled. (d) Also shown are the magnitudes of 
the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients between the position (y in red, x in blue) and ωout of each 
era’s most reproductively successful agent.

===PDF PAGE 4===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
both latitude and longitude but there is no longer a one-to-one relationship between signal and robot location. 
For example, at era 937 (see Fig. 2b) a typical output signal equation (see Supplementary Equations S6–S7) is
ω
ω
=. − .
.+ −.
+∆ y
xy
55 0 13 9
(1 53 )( 55 0) (2)
tt t
tt tout
in
A given value of ωout corresponds to multiple (x, y) locations. It is a one-to-many relationship. Equally important, 
an input communication signal ωin appears in the equation: the output is modified by the input, indicating a dia-
logue. This dialogue resolves the ambiguity in the signal’s meaning, implying a sign-sign relationship in contrast 
to the sign-object relationship evident earlier in the evolutionary process. A qualitative transition in the com -
munication scheme has clearly occurred. The indexical mode of communication has evolved into a rudimentary 
form of symbolic communication.
A typical equation determining the orientation of the robots employing indexical symbols is
ϑω =. −.+∆ y24 51 06 8 (3)tt tt
in
The equations determining the orientation of the symbolically communicating robots are structurally similar:
ϑω =− .+∆ y55 0 (4)tt tt
in
This structural similarity between these two species suggests that the complexification of the signal outputs 
towards symbolic communication was able to yield reproductive benefits by exploiting the minimal preexisting 
cognitive machinery necessary for indexical communication. The probability of these changes occurring during 
a single reproductive event is small considering the simulation’s mutation rates (see Methods). It is far more 
likely that this transition occurred via a series of mutations and/or sexual recombination events that were able to 
produce reproductively viable transient communication schemes that exploited preexisting listening capabilities. 
Future step-by-step documentation of this transition will require snapshots taken at a frequency several orders of 
magnitude higher than was used to capture the data presented here.
From a communications perspective, the dialogue between two robots from era 937 reveals how they are able 
to negotiate a meeting. They first resolve their difference in latitude (y). When a robot’s (the sender’s) output signal 
is larger than its neighbour’s, ωout >  ωin from the sender’s perspective, it is communicating that the sender is north 
of the receiver (see Figs 2b and 3a). The resulting action is for the sender to move south and the receiver to move 
north. As the two robots converge upon a common latitude, the magnitude of their signals begins to increase. 
Smaller values of x translate to faster increases and larger communication output signals force the receiver back 
towards smaller outputs, thus “calculating” relative robot x positions (Fig. 3b). After this “discussion, ” larger out-
put signals indicate that the sender is “west” of the receiver.
Figure 3. Various visualizations of the evolved communication output ωout. (a) Neighbouring robots 
determine relative y positions via their ωout/in (i.e., dialogue) values oscillating between the two separate regions 
shown here. The ωout/in of the robot with the higher y value will settle in the left region (resulting in a higher 
ωout), while the other settles in the right region (resulting in a lower ωout), thus “deciding” relative north/south 
robot position. (b) As the two robots approach a common y position (the nonlinear part of these plots), the 
robot with the smaller x position will see the magnitude of its ωout increase faster than that of its neighbour, 
which in turn forces the neighbour’s ωout back towards linear behaviour, thus “deciding” their relative east/west 
position.

===PDF PAGE 5===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
The meanings inferred by one robot in the other’s signals emerge from sign-sign relationships. For example, 
if we only observe small communication output signals from a single robot, we would not be able to discern if 
this agent were indicating north, south or east (this is analogous to the “eagle” example given above, where one 
word/sign is not enough to resolve meaning). Since third parties may overhear one half of a dialogue between two 
robots, there is a pressure to prevent eavesdroppers from extracting the location of a potential mate from one side 
of the conversation, as otherwise they might reach this mate first. This pressure may play a role in the emergence 
of these symbolic communication schemes where meaning cannot be extracted from a single robot’s signals, 
although further experimentation is required to confirm this.
These sign-sign relationships are abstract; that is, what they describe cannot be sensed directly by the robots 
(in this case, they cannot directly sense relative position). Furthermore, these relationships are arbitrary; that is, 
alternative meanings can and have emerged from other evolutionary runs. The example above produces a primar-
ily “north/south” movement and is reflected in the communication patterns which evolved; other populations, 
however, have evolved to use an inverted “south/north” communication scheme or even a primarily “east/west” 
system (see Fig. 4, Supplementary Figs S4–S8 and Supplementary Equations S8–S54).
Discussion
These results provide a new window on a potential pathway for the emergence and evolution of symbolic com-
munication (see Supplementary Video S2), one that does not require preexisting brains with a high degree of 
complexity as previously conjectured29. They moreover demonstrate an unbroken evolutionary pathway to simple 
symbolic communication via indexical communication without the need for iconic communication, which has 
previously been proposed as a possible evolutionary stepping stone to symbolic communication30. Simple index-
ical communication strategies similar to the one described above emerged in 99 of 100 simulation runs where 
the communication channel was enabled (10 additional runs were performed with the communication channel 
disabled). Nine of these populations evolved further, developing a rudimentary form of symbolic communica -
tion, as indicated by the sign-sign relationships on which these communication schemes rely2,4 (see Table 1 and 
Supplementary Table S1). Reality is of course much more complex than these simulations, as organisms in nature 
do not typically know their absolute coordinates and natural communication systems contain inherent physical 
information. Moreover, human symbolic communication is largely learned, whereas here behaviours, includ -
ing communication schemes, are genetically encoded. Therefore, while these results demonstrate one possible 
pathway to symbolic communication via indexical communication and without substantial preexisting cogni -
tive complexity, this is not necessarily the evolutionary path that human communication took, nor does this 
prove that symbolic communication cannot emerge from iconic communication or cognitive preadaptations. 
Nonetheless, these results demonstrate that simple symbolic communication can emerge spontaneously from 
a population of initially noncommunicating embodied agents in a relatively short evolutionary timespan given 
Figure 4. The genome of an agent with an evolved symbolic communication scheme is embodied in 
two e-puck robots. Agents are supplied with their position information via an overhead webcam and colour 
detection software. Evolved agents are run on a laptop (not shown) that handles communication between agents 
and sends instructions to the robots via Bluetooth. Two hardware experiments are shown, with images taken 
at 5 second intervals shown in the first row, and the corresponding inter-robot communication data shown 
underneath. Auditory interpretations of ωout values are provided in Supplementary Audio S3–S4.
Comm. 
type
Number of 
runs
Max. isl. repro. rate (per era) Number of eras
μ σ Rank-sum μ σ Rank-sum
Symbolic 9 23890.11 1044.48 P <  0.00001 1234.00 173.91 P =  0.12215
Indexical 90 20030.89 1510.12 1373.19 296.99
P <  0.00001 P =  0.09423None 11 7559.55 409.96 1222.36 242.98
Table 1. Summary of results. Runs are divided into three types based on the highest level of communication 
that emerged (“none” in the case of one run where communication never emerged and 10 additional runs with 
ωin =  0 for all t). The average (μ), standard deviation (σ), and two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test P values are 
shown.

===PDF PAGE 6===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
a limited capacity communication channel, no conflict of interest, and a selection pressure for cooperation. The 
role of overheard signals in shaping these symbolic communication schemes and the potential effects of deceptive 
signals on the evolutionary process are left to future work.
Given the cognitive simplicity of these symbolically communicating robots, one cannot help but wonder why 
humans are the only species to have evolved symbolic communication in nature. One possible explanation is that 
the combined dimensionality of both verbal and nonverbal animal communication media, as well as their inher-
ent information (such as directionality), provide sufficient information transmission capacity for animal species’ 
communication needs. We might also speculate that perhaps similar symbolic systems do exist in other species 
but that we have not yet discovered them. However, it may require the combination of other specifically human 
skills that enable cultural evolution for such a simple system to be elevated into the kind of complex communica-
tion system we observe in human language.
Methods
Evolvable mathematical models. The evolvable mathematical models (EMMs) used to represent the 
agents are defined by a system of equations of the form
ϑω∆=+∆vv f(, ,) (4)tt tt t
in
ϑϑ ω=+∆ gv(, ,) (5)tt tt t
in
ωϑ ω=+∆ hv(, ,) (6)tt tt t
in in
where vt is the state vector of the agent at time t, vt + Δt =  vt +  Δ vt+ Δt at the next timestep, ϑ t is the motor output 
governing the direction of the robot’s movement relative to a given reference direction and ωt
in/out are the robot’s 
input (from the nearest neighbour) and output communication signals. Every state vector includes the coordi-
nates xt, yt of the robot. These equations are encoded in a set of directed tree graphs which serves as the agent’s 
genome (see Supplementary Fig. S1). Terminal nodes of the equation trees take on the values of one of the varia-
bles (variable leaves) or a numerical constant (constant leaves) while nonterminal (branch) nodes perform one of 
the four basic arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division). We use the term “evolvable 
mathematical model” to refer to the genomic representation of agents by equation trees as evolved via genetic 
programming.
NoiseWorld. When two robots come into close proximity to each other (within a prespecified “reproduction 
distance” ρ, here ρ =  0.139), an offspring is born by sexual reproduction using genetic programming. During 
reproduction, offspring genomes are subject to a variety of genetic operators. For each equation that the two par-
ents have in common (the equations have unique identification tags based on when they first appeared via muta-
tion in the simulation), either the equation from parent 1 or parent 2 will go to the offspring. Which equation is 
inherited is decided randomly for each equation in common. An offspring must receive at least one equation from 
each parent, thus sexual reproduction is enforced at the equation level. If an offspring receives an equation that 
contains a variable modified by another equation that is not common to both parents, the offspring will inherit 
that equation as well (see Supplementary Fig. S2 for several examples).
A mutation will occur in an equation tree with a probability of p
m; here pm =  0.025β/n, where n is the number 
of trees in the genome and β is independently calculated on each island every 10,000 timesteps as 500/ b with b 
being the numbers of births on the island in the previous 10,000 timesteps. The parameter β saturates at 100 but 
has no minimum; it is used in an effort to keep the number of mutations per unit time constant.
A tree mutation is a point or subtree mutation with equal probability. A point mutation takes the form of a 
perturbation of a constant leaf (if any exist in the tree) or the mutation of another node with equal probability. A 
perturbation of a constant is drawn from the Guassian distribution N(μ, σ); here, μ =  0 and σ =  0.5. A mutation to 
a branch-node reassigns it to another arithmetic operation and a mutation to a variable leaf changes it to another 
variable or a new constant, k; here, k ∈ [− 5, 5]. A subtree mutation replaces a randomly selected node with a ran-
domly generated subtree (generated via the ramped half-and-half method, see below). There is a 5% chance that 
the randomly generated subtree will replace the entire original tree, with the original tree then being spliced onto 
a randomly selected node on this new subtree. A genetic splice operation occurs with a probability p
m whereby a 
randomly selected node is replaced with a randomly selected subtree from a parent genome.
Initial conditions of the state, v0, are also subject to mutation with probability pm; in these mutations, the initial 
state values are either augmented by a perturbation taken from N(0, 0.25) or completely replaced with a random 
value drawn from the interval [− 1, 1] with equal probability.
Finally, for each tree in an offspring genome, there is a probability 0.5p
m that a new state equation will be 
added to the offspring’s genome, with a reference to the corresponding new state variable inserted into a ran-
domly selected location on the tree. The equation tree for the new variable is initialized in the same manner as for 
the primordial population (see below).
There is a total of 100 islands in NoiseWorld, each with a large two-dimensional expanse (−  20 <  x <  20,  
− 20 <  y <  20). If a robot reaches the edge of an island (which is only possible with very long lifespans as robots 
are initialized far from the edges of their island and can only move an average of 0.0005 units per timestep, see 
below), it effectively falls off the island, a death that is enforced at the next reproduction event. The subpopula-
tions on each island are isolated except for the occasional migration occurring at birth (see below). Topologically, 
NoiseWorld is toroidal where every island is surrounded by eight neighbouring islands, four sharing a “border” 
and four sharing a “corner” on a two-dimensional manifold. Each island is seeded with 50 agents and each agent 

===PDF PAGE 7===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
is initialized with a random genome using the “ramped half-and-half ” method27 to generate trees with a maxi-
mum depth of 1 or 2. Ramped half-and-half is a combination of two methods, the “full” method and the “grow” 
method. In the “full” method, nonterminal nodes are randomly generated until the maximum depth is reached. 
At the maximum depth, only terminal nodes are created. In the “grow” method, as in the “full” method, only 
terminal nodes are created at the maximum depth. The difference is that before the maximum depth is reached, 
randomly generated nodes can be either terminal or nonterminal nodes, allowing for a wider range of potential 
tree shapes. The ramped half-and-half method chooses to create a random subtree using either the “full” or 
“grow” method with equal probability.
Each agent is supplied with two immutable equations, Δ x
t+Δt =  aΔ t cosϑt and Δ yt+Δt =  aΔ t sinϑt in Δ vt+Δt, 
which govern its movement; a is drawn from N(1, 0.025) and Δ t =  0.0005 in dimensionless time units. Each robot 
knows its latitude and longitude, x and y, but has no direct information about any of its fellow robots. The angle 
ϑt is measured relative to either “east” (+ x direction) or “north” (+ y direction).
Offspring begin life in a randomly selected location on its parents’ island (within a circle, here of radius 
1.13, centred on the origin) although there is a small probability (p b =  0.001) that it will appear on a bordering 
island (diagonal migrations are not permitted). A minimum distance (here the reproduction distance ρ ) to the 
offspring’s nearest neighbour is enforced. Parents are also moved to new random locations on their island (in 
the same manner as described above for their offspring) and reinitialized. Migration allows the spread of genes 
among islands. Otherwise, robots are restricted to remain on their native islands. To maintain a constant popula-
tion, when a birth occurs, another robot randomly dies.
A newly created offspring genome has a 10% chance of being selected to undergo equation reduction. In such 
an event, the following operations are applied recursively across all of the agent’s equation trees:
•	 The subtraction, addition, multiplication or division of two constants is reduced to a single constant by per-
forming the encoded operation.
•	 The sum of two identical subtrees is reduced to 2×  a single version of the subtree.
•	 The subtraction of two identical subtrees is reduced to 0.
•	 The multiplication of a subtree by 0 is reduced to 0.
•	 The division of 0 by a nonzero subtree is reduced to 0.
An agent’s genome is limited to a maximum of 200 nodes across all of its equation trees. An offspring born 
with more than 200 nodes dies immediately.
If one or more of an agent’s output variables exceed the minimum or maximum representable floating-point 
number, the agent will have that output set to a random floating-point number and will be selected to die when 
the next birth occurs.
It is worthwhile noting that further investigation and observation of the robots’ behaviour show the evolu -
tionary process to be developing a simple control mechanism. Taking again the evolved agent of era 937 as our 
example (see Supplementary Equations S6–S7), we see that the mutual dynamics of two identical agents (1 and 2) 
possesses the fixed point x
1 =  x2, y1 =  y2. Moreover, this point behaves in a stable fashion. From a control-theoretic 
viewpoint, then, the evolution produces a stable controller in which the objective is bring two agents to consensus 
in position and where ϑ
t is the control variable and ωout/in serves as the measurement variable.
Computational experiments. All simulation experiments were run for 48 wall clock hours on a dedicated 
Linux server with an Intel Xeon E5540 at 2.53 GHz. Each island is implemented as a separate process so that 
the algorithm can take full advantage of the parallel architecture of the Intel Xeon CPU (8 cores/16 threads). A 
master/slave parallel implementation is used, where a “master” process handles the synchronization of “slave” 
processes (i.e., the islands). Islands are synchronized and migrants exchanged every 10,000 timesteps. Islands 
introduce incoming migrants into their subpopulations at a rate of η = 10,000 migrants per timestep (in a ran-
domized order). Migration events are treated as new births on the receiving island, thus engendering a random 
death on the island at the following timestep. While migration isn’t necessary for symbolic communication to 
emerge, it has the effect of improving the probability of a run achieving symbolic communication, as well as 
reducing the accumulation of neutral mutations in agent genomes, thus significantly increasing the number of 
eras that can be simulated in 48 wall clock hours (Supplementary Table S2).
To test how an island snapshot performs with and without communication enabled (i.e., ω
in =  0), as well as 
to collect data for the correlation calculations (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. S3), a control test simulation was 
performed. The duration of a control test run is one era (100,000 timesteps) and the genomes used are taken from 
a snapshot of an island population. The robots are initially placed randomly in the test world and initialized. If 
during the control test run two robots meet one another (within the distance ρ, see above), the event is counted 
as a reproduction event but no offspring genome is created. Instead, the two parent robots are moved to new 
random locations and reinitialized. This prevents any evolution during the control runs. The effects of births and 
deaths were simulated by moving a robot to new random position and reinitializing it with a probability of 0.001 
per robot per timestep.
For correlation calculations, the communication outputs and position information of the top reproducing 
agent in the snapshot are recorded throughout the test simulation, yielding 100,000 sets of input/output values per 
test. The Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient r (“correlation” in Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. S3)  
was calculated as

===PDF PAGE 8===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
∑∑ ∑ωω ωω=− −




−−


== =
rv vv v() () () ()
(7)i
n
ii
i
n
i
i
n
i
11
2
1
2
where n is the number of samples (n =  100,000), vi is a sample of the input variable in question (i.e., x or y posi-
tion), v is the mean of the input samples, ω i is a sample of the communication output, and ω is the mean of the 
communication output samples. If the communication output is a constant then r is undefined and these points 
are omitted from Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. S3.
Source code. The source code for the computer simulation experiments described in this work is freely avail-
able at https://github.com/pgrouchy/NoiseWorld.
Embodied robotic agents. The hardware experiments in this work were performed on e-puck robots. Two 
agents (EMMs) were run in a synchronized fashion on a laptop, with motor speed adjustments being sent to two 
e-puck robots via Bluetooth.
Robot orientation ϑ and positions x and y were determined using an overhead webcam (640 ×  480 resolution), 
colour detection software and coloured markers affixed to the top of the robots (see Fig. 4). Binary images indicat-
ing the locations of the red or blue markers were created from webcam images by using RGB colour masks. Blob 
detection was then performed on these binary images. The pixel values of the centroids of the two largest blobs 
were used to determine robot position, with the larger of the two red blobs always indicating one robot, and the 
larger of the two blue blobs indicating the other robot. Pixel values of blob centroids were scaled by 424 to yield 
position value magnitudes comparable to those that agents would typically see in simulation. A robot’s orienta-
tion was determined by taking the arctangent (using the atan2 function) of the difference between the pixel values 
of the centroids of its two blobs/markers.
The protocol for the robotic experiments was as follows (Supplementary Fig. S9):
1. Set all agent variables to their initial values.
2. Get agent x and y positions from overhead tracking system.
3. Evaluate both sets of agent equations for 10 timesteps, with an agent’s ω
in being set to the other agent’s ωout 
from the previous timestep. The x and y input values are not changed during these 10 timesteps, although 
new noise values are used at each step; ϑ is treated as an internal variable and is thus updated at each step.
4. Calculate the cumulative expected motion of each agent over the past 10 timesteps. This yields a new 
expected position. Each robot is turned to face its expected position (± π /16) and then set to drive forward. 
If a robot is already within ± π /16 of this expected orientation, it is not turned. If the robots are in motion 
and at least one agent needs to turn, both robots are stopped. Otherwise they are left to continue forward in 
their current direction.
5. Loop back to step 2.
For the hardware experiments presented in this paper, the following EMM was used for both agents:
ϑ
ω
ωϑ
= .+
−. +
=. −. .+
+∆
+∆
x
y
yx
38 9
88 0
88 10 76 (1 80 )
tt
t
tt
tt tt t
in
out
This is the top reproducing agent from a previously unreported run.
Auditory interpretations of communication outputs.  Auditory interpretations of communication 
outputs (Supplementary Audio S1-S4) were generated using SuperCollider. All communication outputs are con-
verted to a frequency using the following equation: freq  =  14(ω
out +  25), with 210 ≤  freq ≤  490. Values that fall 
outside of this range are set to the nearest boundary value. In the case of Fig. 2a, frequencies were produced as 
follows: freq =  140(ω
out +  25) −  3150. Each timestep’s sounds (i.e., the frequency interpretations of the communi-
cation output of each of the two agents being tested) last for 0.05 s.
References
1. Markl, H. Manipulation, modulation, information, cognition: some of the riddles of communication In Experimental Behavioral 
Ecology And Sociobiology (eds. Hölldobler, B. & Lindauer, M.) 163–194 (Sinauer Associates, Inc., 1985).
2. Deacon, T. The Symbolic Species (WW Norton & Company, 1997).
3. Reznikova, Z. Dialog with black box: using information theory to study animal language behaviour. Acta Ethol. 10(1), 1–12 (2007).
4. Peirce, C. S. Logic as semiotic: the theory of signs In The Philosophical Writings Of Peirce (ed. Buchler, J.) 98–119 (Dover Publications 
Inc., 1955).
5. Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L. & Marler, P . Monkey responses to three different alarm calls: evidence of predator classification and 
semantic communication. Science 210(4471), 801–803 (1980).
6. Christiansen, M. H. & Kirby, S. Language evolution: consensus and controversies. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7(7), 300–307 (2003).
7. Jackendoff, R. Foundations Of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution (Oxford Univ. Press, 2002).
8. Donald, M. Origins Of The Modern Mind: Three Stages In The Evolution Of Culture And Cognition (Harvard Univ. Press, 1991).
9. Nieder, A. Prefrontal cortex and the evolution of symbolic reference. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 19(1), 99–108 (2009).
10. Schilhab, T., Stjernfelt, F . & Deacon, T. The Symbolic Species Evolved (Springer, 2012).
11. Quinn, M. Evolving communication without dedicated communication channels in Advances In Artificial Life , ECAL 2001  
(eds Kelemen, J. & Sosík, P .) 357–366 (Springer, 2001).
12. Mitri, S., Floreano, D. & Keller, L. Relatedness influences signal reliability in evolving robots. Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 278(1704), 
378–383 (2011).

===PDF PAGE 9===
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:34615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34615
13. Nolfi, S. & Mirolli, M. Evolving communication in embodied agents: assessment and open challenges In Evolution Of Communication 
And Language In Embodied Agents (eds Nolfi, S. & Mirolli, M.) 215–220 (Springer, 2010).
14. Mitri, S., Floreano, D. & Keller, L. The evolution of information suppression in communicating robots with conflicting interests. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106(37), 15786–15790 (2009).
15. Williams, P . L., Beer, R. D. & Gasser, M. Evolving referential communication in embodied dynamical agents In Artificial Life XI   
(eds Bullock, S., Noble, J., Watson, R. & Bedau, M. A.) 702–709 (MIT Press, 2008).
16. Di Paolo, E. A. Behavioral coordination, structural congruence and entrainment in a simulation of acoustically coupled agents. 
Adaptive Behav. 8(1), 27–48 (2000).
17. Marocco, D. & Nolfi, S. Self-organization of communication in evolving robots In Artificial Life X (eds Rocha, L. M. et al.) 178–184 
(MIT Press, 2006).
18. Wischmann, S., Floreano, D. & Keller, L. Historical contingency affects signaling strategies and competitive abilities in evolving 
populations of simulated robots. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109(3), 864–868 (2012).
19. Pugh, J. K., Goodell, S. & Stanley, K. O. Directional communication in evolved multiagent teams in GECCO ’14 (ed. Igel, C.) 217–224 
(ACM, 2014).
20. Lehman, J. & Stanley, K. O. Exploiting open-endedness to solve problems through the search for novelty In Artificial Life XI   
(eds Bullock, S., Noble, J., Watson, R. & Bedau, M. A.) 329–336 (MIT Press, 2008).
21. Nelson, A. L., Barlow, G. J. & Doitsidis, L. Fitness functions in evolutionary robotics: a survey and analysis. Robotics and Autonomous 
Syst. 57(4), 345–370 (2008).
22. Werner, G. M. & Dyer, M. G. Evolution of communication in artificial organisms In Artificial Life II (eds Langton, C. G., Taylor, C., 
Farmer, J. D. & Rasmussen, S.) 659–687 (Addison-Wesley, 1991).
23. Lenski, R. E., Ofria, C., Pennock, R. T. & Adami, C. The evolutionary origin of complex features. Nature 423(6936), 139–144 (2003).
24. Knoester, D. B., McKinley, P . K., Beckmann, B. & Ofria, C. Directed evolution of communication and cooperation in digital 
organisms In Advances in Artificial Life, ECAL 2007 384–394 (Springer, 2007).
25. Grouchy, P . & D’Eleuterio, G. M. T. Evolving autonomous agent controllers as analytical mathematical models In Artificial Life 14 
(eds Sayama, H., Rieffel, J., Risi, S., Doursat, R. & Lipson, H.) 681–688 (MIT Press, 2014).
26. Koza, J. R. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection, Vol 1 (MIT Press, 1992).
27. Poli, R., Langdon, W . W . B. & McPhee, N. F . A Field Guide to Genetic Programming. (2008) Available at http://www.gpfield-guide.org.
uk. (Accessed: 2nd February 2016).
28. Dawkins, M. S. & Guilford, T. Design of an intention signal in the bluehead wrasse (Thalassoma bifasciatum). Proc. R. Soc. London 
Ser. B 257(1349), 123–128 (1994).
29. Bickerton, D. Symbol and structure: a comprehensive framework for language evolution in Language Evolution (eds.Christiansen, 
M. H. & Kirby, S.) 77–93 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2003).
30. Perniss P ., Thompson, R. L. & Vigliocco, G. Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence from spoken and signed languages. 
Front. Psychol. 1(227) (2010).
Acknowledgements
P .G. was supported by CGS-D and CGS-MSFSS awards from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada (NSERC). Computations were performed on the GPC supercomputer at the SciNet HPC 
Consortium. SciNet is funded by: the Canada Foundation for Innovation under the auspices of Compute Canada; 
the Government of Ontario; Ontario Research Fund - Research Excellence; and the University of Toronto.
Author Contributions
P .G. and G.M.T.D’E. conceived the concept and the simulation experiments. H.L. conceived the physical 
demonstration. P .G., H.L. and G.M.T.D’E. designed the simulation experiments. P .G. conducted the simulation 
and hardware experiments and wrote the Supplementary Information. M.H.C. and P .G. developed the theoretical 
framing of the results, with contributions from G.M.T.D’E. and H.L. All authors discussed the results and 
implications, and all authors contributed to the writing and review of the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Grouchy, P . et al. On The Evolutionary Origin of Symbolic Communication. Sci. Rep. 6, 
34615; doi: 10.1038/srep34615 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016