PAGE 1
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original citation: 
Senghas, Ann, Kita, Sotaro, 1963- and Özyürek, A.. (2004) Children creating core 
properties of language : evidence from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua. 
Science, Volume 305 (Number 5691). pp. 1779-1782. ISSN 0036-8075 
 
Permanent WRAP url: 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/66237               
 
Copyright and reuse: 
The Warwick Research Archive Portal (WRAP) makes this work by researchers of the 
University of Warwick available open access under the following conditions.  Copyright © 
and all moral rights to the version of the paper presented here belong to the individual 
author(s) and/or other copyright owners.  To the extent reasonable and practicable the 
material made available in WRAP has been checked for eligibility before being made 
available. 
 
Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, educational, or not-for  
profit purposes without prior permission or charge.  Provided that the authors, title and 
full bibliographic details are credited, a hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original 
metadata page and the content is not changed in any way. 
 
Publisher’s statement: 
The definitive version was published in Science on Volume 305, Number 5691. (2004). 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1100199 ” 
 
A note on versions: 
The version presented here may differ from the published version or, version of record, if 
you wish to cite this item you are advised to consult the publisher’s version.  Please see 
the ‘permanent WRAP url’ above for details on accessing the published version and note 
that access may require a subscription. 
 
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: publications@warwick.ac.uk  


PAGE 2
Children creating core properties of language: Evidence froman emerging sign language in NicaraguaAnn Senghas1, Sotaro Kita2, AslI Özyürek3,4, 5
1Department of Psychology, Barnard College of Columbia University, 3009 Broadway,New York, NY 100272University of Bristol, Department of Experimental Psychology, 8 Woodland Road,Bristol BS8 1TN, UK3F.C. Donders Center for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen University, Adelbertusplein1, 6525 EK Nijmegen, The Netherlands4Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, TheNetherlands5Koç University, Department of Psychology, Rumeli Feneri Yolu, 34450, Sariyer,Istanbul, TurkeyA new sign language has been created by deaf Nicaraguans over the past 35 years,providing an opportunity to observe the inception of universal hallmarks oflanguage.  The present study shows that children initially creating the languagebegan analyzing complex events into basic elements, and sequencing these elementsinto hierarchically structured expressions, following principles not observed ingestures accompanying speech in the surrounding language.  Successive cohorts oflearners extended this procedure, transforming Nicaraguan signing from its earlygestural form into a linguistic system.  We propose that this early segmentation andrecombination reflect mechanisms with which children learn, and therebyperpetuate, language.  Thus, children naturally possess learning abilities capable ofgiving language its fundamental structure.

PAGE 3
2
Certain properties of language are so central to the way languages operate, and sowidely observed, that Hockett termed them “design features” of language(1).  This studyasks whether these properties can arise naturally as a product of language-learningmechanisms, even when they are not available in the surrounding language environment.We focus here on two particular properties of language: discreteness and combinatorialpatterning.  Every language consists of a finite set of re-combinable parts.  These basicelements are perceived categorically, not continuously, and are organized in a principled,hierarchical fashion.  For example, we have discrete sounds that are combined to formwords, that are combined to form phrases, and then sentences, and so on.  Even thoseaspects of the world that are experienced as continuous and holistic are represented withlanguage that is discrete and combinatorial.  Together, these properties make it possibleto generate an infinite number of expressions with a finite system.  It is generally agreedthat they are universal hallmarks of language, though their origin is the subject ofcontinued controversy(2-7).Humans are capable of representations that lack these properties. For example, non-linguistic representations such as maps and paintings derive their structure iconically,from their referent. That is, patterns in the representation correspond, part-for-part, topatterns in the thing represented.  In this way, half a city map represents half a city.Unlike language, such non-linguistic representations are typically analog and holistic.The present study documents the emergence of discreteness and combinatorialpatterning in a new language.  Over the past 35 years, a sign language has arisen within acommunity of deaf Nicaraguans who lacked exposure to a developed language.  This

PAGE 4
3
situation enables us to discover how fundamental language properties emerge as the non-linguistic becomes linguistic.Before the 1970s, deaf Nicaraguan children and adults had little contact with eachother. Societal attitudes kept most deaf individuals at home, and the few schools andclinics available served small numbers of children.  Interviews with former studentsreveal little evidence of contact with classmates outside school, or after graduation(8, 9).In this context, no sign language emerged, evidenced by the lack of language in today’sadults over the age of 45.In such situations, deaf people will often develop “home signs”: communicationsystems built up out of common gestures, used with family members.  Though not fulllanguages, home signs exhibit some of the rudiments of language(10, 11).  The homesign systems developed by Nicaraguans appear to have varied widely from one deafperson to another in form and complexity(12).This situation changed abruptly with the opening of an expanded elementary schoolfor special education in 1977, followed by a vocational school in 1981, both in Managua.Deaf enrollment in the programs initially comprised approximately 50 students, growingto over 200 by 1981, and increasing gradually throughout the 1980s.  Crucially, studentscontinued their contact outside school hours, and by the mid-1980s deaf adolescents weremeeting regularly on the weekends(8). Although instruction in school was conducted inSpanish (with minimal success), these first children began to develop a new, gesturalsystem for communicating with each other. The gestures soon expanded to form an earlysign language(13, 14).  Through continued use, both in and out of school, the growing

PAGE 5
4
language has been passed down and relearned naturally every year since, as each newwave of children entered the community(15).Today there are approximately 800 deaf signers of Nicaraguan Sign Language(NSL), ranging from 4 to 45 years of age.  Previous research on NSL has found thatchanges in its grammar first appear among preadolescent signers, soon spreading tosubsequent, younger learners, but not to adults(16).  This pattern of transmission, whencombined with the rapid and recent expansion of NSL, has created an unusual languagecommunity in which the most fluent signers are the youngest, most recent learners.Consequently, much of the history of the language can be surveyed by performing aseries of observations, progressing from the older signers, who retain much of NSL’searly nature, to younger, more recent learners, who produce the language in its expanded,most developed form.Following this logic, the present study compares the signed expressions of 30 deafNicaraguans, grouped into cohorts according to the year that they were first exposed toNSL: 10 from a first cohort (prior to 1984), 10 from a second cohort (1984-1993), and 10from a third cohort (after 1993).  All of the deaf participants have been signing NSL sincethe age of six or younger.  Their signed expressions are compared to the gesturesproduced by 10 hearing Nicaraguan Spanish-speakers while speaking Spanish(17).In particular, we examine the gestures and signs in expressions that describecomplex motion events, such as rolling down a hill, or climbing up a wall.  We chosedescriptions of motion for two reasons.  First, previous research has found that whenspeakers describe motion events, they often produce co-speech gestures that iconically

PAGE 6
5
represent the movement(18, 19).  Such gestures (unlike speech) are fully available to deafobservers, likely providing raw materials to shape into a sign language.  Second, thedescription of motion offers a promising domain for detecting the introduction ofsegmented, linear, and hierarchical organization of information into a communicationsystem.  Motion events include a manner of movement (such as rolling) and a path ofmovement (such as descending).  These characteristics of motion are simultaneousaspects of a single event and are experienced holistically. The most direct way toiconically represent such an event would be to represent manner and path simultaneously.Languages, in contrast, typically encode manner and path in separate elements, combinedaccording to the rules of the particular language(20).  For example, English produces oneword to express manner (rolling) and another to express path (down), and assembles theminto the sequence rolling down.  Signing that dissects motion events into separate mannerand path elements, and assembles them into a sequence, would exhibit the segmentationand linearization typical of developed languages, and unlike the experience of motionitself.To collect samples of signing and gesturing describing motion events, we presentedparticipants with an animated cartoon and videotaped them telling its story to a peer.Deaf subjects signed their narratives.  Hearing subjects spoke Spanish, and only their co-speech gestures were analyzed. Those expressions that included both manner and pathinformation were coded with respect to how the information was integrated: a)simultaneously, as a single hand movement; and/or b) sequentially, articulated separately

PAGE 7
6
within in a string of simple manner-only and path-only elements (See Fig. 1).  Note that asingle multi-gesture expression can include both means of integration.Two analyses compared, across groups, the use of each method of integration.  Theproportion of the expressions produced by each participant that include manner and pathsimultaneously are presented in the Figure 2A.  All of the Spanish speakers’ gestures(1.0), and most of the first-cohort signers’ expressions (.73) use this approach.  Second-and third-cohort signers produce relatively fewer expressions of this type (.32 and .38).The proportion of expressions produced by each participant that articulate manner andpath sequentially are presented in Figure 2B.  Such sequences are never observed in theSpanish-speakers’ gestures (0).  First-cohort signers sometimes include such sequences(.27); second- and third-cohort signers include such sequences in most of theirexpressions (.78 and .73).In appearance, the signs very much resembled the gestures that accompany speech.The movements of the hands and body in the sign language are clearly derived from agestural source.  Nevertheless, the analyses reveal a qualitative difference betweengesturing and signing.  In gesture, manner and path were integrated by expressing themsimultaneously and holistically, the way they occur in the motion itself.  Despite thisanalog, holistic nature of the gesturing that surrounded them, the first cohort of children,who started building NSL in the late 1970s, evidently introduced the possibility ofdissecting out manner and path, and assembling them into a sequence of elemental units.As second and third cohorts learned the language in the mid-1980s and 1990s, theyrapidly made this segmented, sequenced construction the preferred means of expressing

PAGE 8
7
motion events.  NSL thus quickly acquired the discrete, combinatorial nature that is ahallmark of language.Note that this change to the language, in the short term, entails a loss ofinformation.  When representations express manner and path separately, it is no longericonically clear that the two aspects of movement occurred simultaneously, within asingle event.  For example, roll followed by downward might have instead referred totwo separate events, meaning “rolling, then descending.”However, the communicative power gained by combining elements more thanoffsets this potential for ambiguity.  Elements and sequencing provide the building blocksfor linguistic constructions (such as phrases and sentences) whose structure assignsmeaning beyond the simple sum of the individual words.  We observed one suchstructured sequence pattern that has emerged specifically for expressing simultaneity.  Asign can be produced before and after another sign or phrase in an A-B-A construction,essentially embedding the second element within the first, yielding expressions such asroll descend roll.  This string can serve as a structural unit within a larger expression likecat [roll descend roll], or can even be embedded within another sign, as in waddle [rolldescend roll] waddle, and so on.  These A-B-A constructions appeared in approximatelya third of the coded expressions (.37) by participants from all three cohorts: 4 first-cohortsigners, 7 second-cohort-signers, and 6 third-cohort signers.  They were used to linkvarious simultaneous aspects of events, including agent and action (cat climb cat), groundand action (climb pipe climb), and manner and path (roll descend roll). We observed 15examples of these constructions applied specifically for combining manner and path

PAGE 9
8
information, again by signers of all three cohorts: 2 first-cohort signers, 4 second-cohortsigners, and 4 third-cohort signers.  They never appeared in the gestures of the Spanish-speakers, and they represent a temporal hierarchy not found in motion events themselves.Such hierarchical combinations are central to the language engine, enabling theproduction of an infinite set of utterances with a finite set of elements.  Thus, theemergence of this construction in NSL represents a shift from gesture-like to language-like expression.It is informative that the first-cohort signers, who originated the language whenthey were children in the late 1970s, continue to produce it today in a form closer to itsgestural model.  We take this as an indication of the extent of their impact on NSL beforethe mid-1980s, when they reached adolescence.  The children who were arriving in themid-1980s then became NSL’s second wave of creative learners, picking up where thefirst cohort left off, and making changes that were never fully acquired by now-adolescent first-cohort signers (15, 16).  The difference today between first- and second-cohort signers therefore indicates what children could do that adolescents and adultscould not.  It appears that the processes of dissection, reanalysis, and recombination areamong those that become less available beyond adolescence.  Such an age effect isconsistent with, and would partially explain, the pre-adolescent sensitive period forlanguage acquisition discussed in other work (21, 22).  Using their early learning skills,those who were still children in the mid-1980s developed NSL into the more discrete andcombinatorial system that they, and the children that followed in the 1990s, still exhibittoday.

PAGE 10
9
Because NSL is such a young language, recently created by children, its changesreveal learning mechanisms available during childhood.  Our observations highlight twoof these mechanisms:  1) a dissecting, segmental approach to bundles of information.This analytical approach appears to override other patterns of organization in the input, tothe point of breaking apart previously unanalyzed wholes; and 2) a predisposition forlinear sequencing.  Sequential combinations appear even when it is physically possible tocombine elements simultaneously, and despite the availability of a simultaneous model.We propose that such learning processes leave an imprint on languages, observable inmature languages in their core, universal properties, including discrete elements (such aswords and morphemes), combined into hierarchically-organized constructions (such asphrases and sentences).Accordingly, these learning mechanisms should influence language emergence andchange as long as there are children available to take up a language.  Consistent with thisaccount, linear sequencing of elements (even when representing simultaneous aspects ofan event) appears to be an initially favored device in language emergence(23).  Forexample, strong word order regularities are well-documented in creoles, young languagesthat arise out of particular social situations of language contact(24-26).  Some theories ofcreolization hold that child learners drive this process(27, 28).  Our findings, in line withthese approaches, favor a degree of child influence in identifying and sequencingelements(29).However, these learning predispositions will not fully determine a language’seventual structure.  For example, many sign languages use simultaneous combinations in

PAGE 11
10
addition to sequential ones.  Nevertheless, even in cases where adults use simultaneousconstructions, the pattern of children’s acquisition points to a preference for linearsequencing(23).  For example, research on the acquisition of American Sign Language(ASL)(23, 30) has shown that children initially break complex verb expressions downinto sequential morphemes, rather than produce multiple verb elements together in thesingle, simultaneous movement found in adult models. In ASL, over-segmentation duringacquisition was observed across a number of element types, including the agent andpatient of a transitive event, and, as in NSL, the manner and path of a motion event.These elements correspond to semantic units that are relevant to lexicalization patterns inmany (possibly all) languages(20).  Thus, the elements chosen for segmentation mayreveal the very primitives that children are predisposed to seek out as basic, grammaticalunits.Such primitives, and the processes that isolate and recombine them, are central tochildren’s language-learning machinery today.  Whether these drove the formation of thevery first human languages depends on whether languages shaped learning abilities, orlearning abilities shaped languages.  We speculate that a combination of the two was thecase.  Once language developed a discrete and hierarchical nature, children who tendedtoward analytical and combinatorial learning would have an advantage acquiring it (3).In this way, evolutionary pressures would shape children's language-learning (and now,language-building) mechanisms to be analytical and combinatorial.  On the other hand,once humans were equipped with analytical, combinatorial learning mechanisms, any

PAGE 12
11
subsequently-learned languages would be shaped into discrete and hierarchically-organized systems.(4, 5)While our findings are consistent with both directions of effect in the evolution oflearners and languages, they are at odds with accounts in which such attributes evolvedexternally, were passed from generation to generation solely through culturaltransmission, and were never reflected in the nature of the learning mechanism(7).  Instudies of mature languages, the potential imprint of the learning mechanism is redundantwith, and hence experimentally obscured by, pre-existing language structure.  But therapid restructuring of Nicaraguan Sign Language as it is passed down through successivecohorts of learners shows that even where discreteness and hierarchical combination areabsent from the language environment, human learning abilities are capable of creatingthem anew.References and Notes1.C. F. Hockett, Refurbishing our Foundations : Elementary Linguistics from anAdvanced Point of View (J. Benjamins, Philadelphia, 1987).2.M. H. Christiansen, S. Kirby, Trends Cog. Sci. 7, 300 (2003).3.R. Jackendoff, Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution(Oxford University Press, New York, 2002).4.M. D. Hauser, N. Chomsky, W. T. Fitch, Science 298, 1569 (2002).5.S. Pinker, P. Bloom, Behav. Brain Sci. 13, 707 (1990).6.S. Kirby, Function, Selection, and Innateness: The Emergence of LanguageUniversals (Oxford University Press, New York, 1999).

PAGE 13
12
7.M. Tomasello, in Language Evolution M. H. Christiansen, S. Kirby, Eds. (OxfordUniversity Press, New York, 2003), pp. 94-110.8.L. Polich, But with Sign Language You Can Do So Much (Gallaudet UniversityPress, forthcoming).9.R. J. Senghas, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Rochester (1997).10.S. Goldin-Meadow, in Language Acquisition: The State of the Art E. Wanner, L.R. Gleitman, Eds. (Cambridge University Press, New York, 1982), pp. 51-77.11.J. P. Morford, Language and Communication 16, 165 (1996).12.M. Coppola, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Rochester (2002).13.J. Kegl, A. Senghas, M. Coppola, in Language Creation and Language Change:Creolization, Diachrony, and Development M. DeGraff, Ed. (MIT Press,Cambridge, MA, 1999) pp. 179-237.14.A. Senghas, Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1995).15.A. Senghas, M. Coppola, Psychol. Sci. 12, 323 (2001).16.A. Senghas, Cognitive Development 18, 511 (2003).17.Further information on participants, methods, and analyses are available onScience Online.18.S. Kita, A. Özyürek, Journal of Memory & Language 48, 16 (2003).19.D. McNeill, Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal about Thought (University ofChicago Press, 1992).20.L. Talmy, in Grammatical Categories and the Lexicon, Vol. III T. Shopen, Ed.(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1985) pp. 57-149.

PAGE 14
13
21.E. Lenneberg, Biological Foundations of Language (Wiley, New York, 1967).22.E. L. Newport, Cognitive Science 14, 11 (1990).23.E. Newport, in Aspects of the development of competence.  Minnesota Symposiaon Child Psychology W. A. Collins, Ed. (Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1981), vol. 14,pp. 93-124.24.J. Holm, Pidgins and Creoles, Vol. 1:  Theory and Structure (CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, 1988).25.M. DeGraff, Ed., Language Creation and Language Change : Creolization,Diachrony, and Development (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999).26.R. W. Anderson, in Pidginization and Creolization as Language Acquisition R.Anderson, Ed. (Newbury House, Rowley, MA, 1983) pp. 1-56.27.D. Bickerton, Behav. Brain Sci. 7, 173 (1984).28.G. Sankoff, S. Laberge, Kivung 6, 32 (1973).29.Unlike NSL, creoles draw much of their vocabulary and possibly somegrammatical structure from the languages in contact where they arise; muchdebate surrounds the question of the nature and degree of this influence (25).30.R. P. Meier, J. Mem. Lang. 26, 362 (1987).31. Grateful thanks are extended to the Nicaraguan participants for their enthusiasticparticipation, and to the Melania Morales School for Special Education, TheNational Nicaraguan Association of the Deaf (ANSNIC), and the NicaraguanMinistry of Education, Culture, and Sports (MEDCD) for their assistance andcooperation. We thank Quaker House, Managua, for providing testing facilities.

PAGE 15
14
Alina Engelman, Molly Flaherty, Elizabeth Housman, Shira Katseff, SarahLittman, Jennie Pyers, Marisol Santos, and Penny Shima assisted with datacollection and analysis; Samuel Bogoch, Peter Hagoort, Steven Pinker, andRobert Short commented on earlier versions of the manuscript.  Research andwriting was supported by the Language and Cognition Group at the Max PlanckInstitute for Psycholinguistics, the Netherlands Organization for ScientificResearch (NWO) project 051.02.040 (A.O.), NIH/NIDCD grant RO1 DC00491 toSusan Goldin-Meadow and A.O., Turkish Academy of Sciences grantHAO/TUBA-GEBIP/2001-2-16 (A.O.), a visiting faculty position in Psychologyat Harvard University (A.S.), and by NIH/NIDCD grant R01 DC05407 (A.S.).

PAGE 16
15
Fig 1.  Examples of motion event expressions from participants’ narratives. (A)  Mannerand path expressed simultaneously.  This example shows a Spanish-speaker describing anevent in which a cat, having swallowed a bowling ball, proceeds rapidly down a steepstreet in a wobbling, rolling manner.  The gesture shown here naturally accompanies hisspeech.  Here manner (wiggling) and path (trajectory to the speaker’s right) are expressedtogether in a single holistic movement.  (B)  Manner and path expressed sequentially.This example shows a third-cohort signer describing the same rolling event in NicaraguanSign Language.  Here manner (circling) and path (trajectory to signer’s right) areexpressed in two separate signs, assembled into a sequence.  (The video clips from whichthe frames were drawn can be viewed at Science Online.)Fig 2.  (A) The proportion of expressions that include manner and path that articulatethem simultaneously within a single gesture or sign.  Proportions were computed for eachparticipant.  Bars indicate mean proportions for each of the four groups; error barsindicate standard error.  All of the co-speech gestures and most of the first-cohort signers’expressions articulated manner and path simultaneously.  Second- and third-cohortsigners produce relatively fewer expressions of this type.  Proportions differ significantlyacross the four groups (Kruskal-Wallis, p < .02, df = 3, χ2 = 10.8).  Post-hoc analyseswith Bonferroni adjustment indicate that the Spanish-speakers differ significantly fromsecond-cohort signers (Mann-Whitney, p < .04) and marginally from third-cohort signers(Mann-Whitney, p < .06).  (B) The proportion of expressions that include manner andpath that articulate them sequentially in a string of manner-only and path-only elements.Proportions were computed for each participant.  Bars indicate mean proportions for each

PAGE 17
16
of the four groups; error bars indicate standard error.  These sequential expressions arenever observed in the co-speech gestures.  First-cohort signers sometimes produce suchsequences; second- and third-cohort signers include them in most of their expressions.Proportions differ significantly across the four groups (Kruskal-Wallis, p <.01, df = 3,χ2 =14.7).  Post-hoc analyses with Bonferroni adjustment indicate that the Spanish-speakers differ significantly from both second-cohort signers (Mann-Whitney, p <.02)and third-cohort signers (Mann-Whitney, p <.03).