PAGE 1
 
 
 
 
 
Edinburgh Research Explorer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution of
linguistic structure
Citation for published version:
Kirby, S, Tamariz, M, Cornish, H & Smith, K 2015, 'Compression and communication in the cultural
evolution of linguistic structure', Cognition, vol. 141, pp. 87-102.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016
Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Published In:
Cognition
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 14. Sep. 2026

PAGE 2
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution of
linguistic structure
Simon Kirby a,⇑, Monica Tamariz a, Hannah Cornish b, Kenny Smith a
a School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
b School of Psychology, University of Stirling, Stirling, United Kingdom
article info
Article history:
Received 7 February 2014
Revised 9 February 2015
Accepted 29 March 2015
Available online 14 May 2015
Keywords:
Cultural transmission
Language evolution
Iterated learning
abstract
Language exhibits striking systematic structure. Words are composed of combinations of
reusable sounds, and those words in turn are combined to form complex sentences.
These properties make language unique among natural communication systems and
enable our species to convey an open-ended set of messages. We provide a cultural evolu-
tionary account of the origins of this structure. We show, using simulations of rational
learners and laboratory experiments, that structure arises from a trade-off between pres-
sures for compressibility (imposed during learning) and expressivity (imposed during com-
munication). We further demonstrate that the relative strength of these two pressures can
be varied in different social contexts, leading to novel predictions about the emergence of
structured behaviour in the wild.
/C2112015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Language is unique among the communication systems
of the natural world in exhibiting rich combinatorial and
compositional structure. Our species can productively
construct novel signals on the ﬂy by recombining reusable
meaningless elements (speech sounds) to form
meaning-bearing units (morphemes and words) which
are further recursively combined. Furthermore, the mean-
ings of these complex utterances are derivable in a pre-
dictable way from the composition of their subparts. The
precise way in which this combinatorial and compositional
structure is realised differs from language to language
and is part of the knowledge that each language learner
must acquire. Nevertheless, the existence of this kind of
systematicity is both universal to all languages – it is one
of the fundamental design features of human language
(Hockett, 1960) – and largely absent in the communication
of other species. 1
Understanding the origins of this structure is a central
goal of cognitive science. A recent productive approach
treats it as a consequence of cultural evolution
(Christiansen & Chater, 2008 ). Languages, in common with
many other human behaviours, persist through a repeated
cycle of learning and production: individuals learn a lan-
guage by observing the linguistic behaviour of their speech
community, and the linguistic behaviour they subse-
quently produce shapes learning in others. Languages
potentially change and evolve as a result of their
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016
0010-0277//C2112015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: simon@ling.ed.ac.uk (S. Kirby).
1 Some aspects of this universality remain controversial. For example,
the evidence for recursion in some languages is limited ( Everett, 2005 ),
although such languages remain open-ended in their productivity. Equally,
some aspects of the suite of structural design features can be found in a
limited way in other species ( Collier, Bickel, van Schaik, Manser, &
Townsend, 2014 ). Bird song is combinatorial ( Berwick, Okanoya, Beckers,
& Bolhuis, 2011 ), and bee dance is compositional in a limited sense ( von
Frisch, 1975). However, bee dance is not culturally transmitted like human
language, and neither birds nor bees can exploit these properties to
communicate an open-ended set of meanings.
Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Cognition
journal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/COGNIT


PAGE 3
transmission, adapting to the biases inherent in the pro-
cesses of language learning and language use.
In this paper we present computational and experimen-
tal models of the processes of language transmission which
show that structure (speciﬁcally, compositionality) arises
from cultural evolution when language is under pressure
to be both learnable and expressive: language learning by
naïve individuals introduces a pressure for simplicity aris-
ing from a domain-independent bias for compressibility in
learning, and a pressure for expressivity arises from lan-
guage use in communication. Crucially, both must be in
play: neither pressure alone leads reliably to structure.
The structural design features of language are a solution
to the problem of being compressible and expressive, a
solution delivered by the process of cultural evolution.
1.1. Compressibility and expressivity in language design
The idea that key features of language arise from the
trade-off between competing pressures has a long history.
Competing motivations of speaker and hearer, for instance,
have been a rich explanatory tool for cognitive scientists
(e.g. Zipf, 1949; Ferrer i Cancho & Solé, 2003; Piantadosi,
Tily, & Gibson, 2012 ) and linguists seeking explanations
for typological universals of language (e.g. Givón, 1979;
DuBois, 1987; Kirby, 1997; Jäger, 2007 ): for example,
utterances in a language will tend to minimise effort for
the speaker as long as distinctiveness for the hearer is
not compromised ( Zipf, 1949 ). This kind of observation
can be couched in terms of compression, i.e., optimisation
of a repertoire of signals such that the energetic cost of
unambiguously conveying any meaning is minimised.
This leads naturally to the inverse relationship between
frequency and length of words identiﬁed by Zipf (1936) ;
more generally, it has been suggested that such
optimally-compressible signal inventories are a universal
feature of natural communication systems across all spe-
cies ( Ferrer i Cancho et al., 2013 ).
The fact that language is compositional and combinato-
rial – that it has system-wide structure – also means that
languages as whole systems are compressible, i.e., allow
the formation of compressed representations. We com-
monly refer to these representations as grammars, which
are concise descriptions of the generative system underly-
ing a language. These are compressed to the degree that
they are more concise than a simple listing of all the pos-
sible utterances in a language. Note that this notion of
compressibility is orthogonal to the compressibility of sig-
nals themselves.2 For example, regular morphological para-
digms are highly systematic and therefore highly
compressible, but this potentially comes at the cost of less
efﬁcient signals, since exploiting unsystematic irregulars
might allow shorter forms (e.g., ‘‘ran’’ is shorter than
‘‘runned’’ but leads to a more complex, less compressible
morphological paradigm).
For our purposes, it will be useful to consider the com-
pressibility of three classes of languages: holistic languages,
lacking any of the system-level structure (e.g. composi-
tionality) that characterises natural languages; structured
languages, which exhibit system-level structure (e.g.
where aspects of meaning reliably co-occur with
sub-parts of signals); and degenerate languages, in which
every meaning is associated with a single, shared, maxi-
mally ambiguous signal. 3 Holistic languages are incom-
pressible: the most concise encoding of a holistic language
would be a dictionary that simply listed every signal paired
with its meaning, i.e., the ‘grammar’ of this language would
simply recapitulate the language in its entirety. Structured
languages, in contrast, permit some compression: a gram-
mar which captured the systematic regularities of such a
language would be considerably shorter than a dictionary
of all the signals in the language. Finally, degenerate lan-
guages are maximally compressible, since the entire lan-
guage can be captured by a single rule stating the identity
of the ambiguous signal. Following, e.g., Chater and Vitanyi
(2003) and Kemp and Regier (2012) , we assume that learn-
ers are naturally biased towards simpler, compressible lan-
guages, in line with the notion that a preference for
simplicity is a fundamental cognitive principle: languages
which permit the formation of compressed mental represen-
tations are easier to learn than those which do not.
As highlighted by Kemp and Regier (2012) , the most
compressible languages are not necessarily useful for com-
munication: in particular, a degenerate language is highly
compressible but not expressive, since it does not allow a
speaker to discriminate an intended referent from possible
alternative referents in a context. In contrast, less com-
pressible languages (e.g. holistic or structured languages)
are expressive to the extent that they provide a unique
and unambiguous signal for every meaning. As demon-
strated by Regier and colleagues for a range of cases (kin-
ship categories, colour terms, numeral systems: Kemp &
Regier, 2012; Xu & Regier, 2014; Regier, Kemp, & Kay,
2015), natural language lexicons exhibit a near-optimal
trade-off between these two pressures, being among the
most expressive and yet compressible of all possible sys-
tems. However, showing that language is near-optimal
with respect to these two pressures does not provide an
explanatory mechanism for this striking ﬁt between the
design and the function of language – the problem of link-
age (Kirby, 1999) remains. In this paper we show that cul-
tural evolution, the process by which languages persist
through a cycle of learning and use, solves the problem
of linkage, and (under some conditions) leads to the emer-
gence of languages which are both highly compressible
and highly expressive. Furthermore, we show that this
same trade-off between compressibility and expressivity,
which has been used to explain the structure of lexicalised
concepts in various domains, also explains the existence of
structural design features like compositionality.
2 A consideration of the possible competition between system-wide
compressibility and the compressibility of signals is an obvious extension
to the model we present in this paper, as are a range of other possible
additional pressures on a language being transmitted (e.g., the structure of
the world: Perfors & Navarro, 2014 ).
3 In reality, languages may not lie cleanly in one or other of these classes.
They may exhibit some partial compositionality, or they may be partially
degenerate, for example.
88 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 4
1.2. Compression and expression in iterated learning
We use iterated learning as a tool to explore how
languages adapt to pressures for compressibility and
expressivity. Iterated learning is the process whereby one
individual learns by observing the output of learning in
another individual, who learned in the same way ( Kirby,
Cornish, & Smith, 2008 ). Iterated learning has been studied
in models (either mathematical or agent-based) and in
experiments with human participants, and provides a
framework for studying the cultural evolution of language
and other behaviours. Models of iterated learning embody-
ing the assumption that learners prefer compressible (i.e.,
simple) grammars shown how this pressure can be ampli-
ﬁed by the ‘‘bottleneck’’ on the cultural transmission of
language. Speciﬁcally, the fact that learners must recon-
struct their language from a ﬁnite subset of data leads to
the development, over many episodes of transmission, of
increasingly compressible grammars ( Kirby, 2002;
Brighton, Smith, & Kirby, 2005b ). Under the additional
assumption that there is an expressivity bias in the learn-
ers favouring one-to-one mappings between meanings
and signals ( Brighton et al., 2005b ), these simulations
demonstrate the emergence of compositional structure.
Other simulation models have focussed on the emergence
of combinatorial structure in phonology through processes
of repeated reproduction ( Oudeyer, 2006; Zuidema & De
Boer, 2009; De Boer & Zuidema, 2010; Wedel, 2012 ).
These models too have at their core a bias to favour simple
systems (e.g. by merging categories, or reinforcing fre-
quently recurring representations) alongside pressures to
maintain distinctiveness of forms.
More recently, this simulation-based modelling work
has been complemented by laboratory studies using adult
human participants (for review see Scott-Phillips & Kirby,
2010; Kirby, Grifﬁths, & Smith, 2014 ). In these studies,
building on well-established artiﬁcial language learning
paradigms ( Gomez & Gerken, 2000 ), researchers observe
how an artiﬁcial language or communication system is
changed by transmission between experimental partici-
pants. In one such experiment, Kirby et al., 2008 recreate
in the lab a cultural process that closely parallels earlier
simulations of iterated learning. They use a transmission
chain method (Mesoudi & Whiten, 2008) where each partic-
ipant learns the language produced by the previous partic-
ipant in the test phase of the experiment. As in the models,
an initially holistic language (i.e., a highly incompressible
language, lacking the structure characteristic of natural
language) becomes ever simpler over generations; the
eventual outcome of this process is a highly compressible,
largely degenerate language, in which many distinct mean-
ings are conveyed with a small number of highly ambigu-
ous signals (a similar effect can also be seen in the results
of Perfors & Navarro, 2014; Silvey, Kirby, & Smith, 2015 ).
Adding an artiﬁcial experimental intervention to discour-
age degenerate languages, for example by the experi-
menter removing ambiguous strings from the training
data (Kirby et al., 2008 ), leads to the emergence of compo-
sitionally structured languages. These results are mirrored
by laboratory experiments looking at culturally transmit-
ted sound systems ( Verhoef, 2012 ), in which a similar
manipulation for removing duplicate signals leads to the
development of combinatorial structure.
In an alternative experimental approach, Garrod, Fay,
Lee, Oberlander, and MacLeod (2007), Fay and Ellison
(2013) and Fay, Garrod, Roberts, and Swoboda (2010) use
a closed group design ( Mesoudi & Whiten, 2008 ) in which
participants are required to communicate a set of
pre-speciﬁed concepts using drawings. Pairs of participants
who repeatedly play the game together develop an expres-
sive system of symbol-like graphical representations to
communicate these concepts. This system of communica-
tion is holistic, since each symbol is an idiosyncratic,
stand-alone entity. Theisen-White, Kirby, and Oberlander
(2011) present a modiﬁed version of this paradigm, intro-
ducing aspects of the transmission chain method: an initial
pair play a variant of the communication game from Garrod
et al. (2007) ; the drawings produced by that pair during
communication are then observed by a fresh pair of partic-
ipants, who go on to communicate together, and so on. The
system of communication is therefore under pressure to be
both expressive (communicatively functional) and learn-
able (easy to reproduce faithfully by the naïve individuals).
Theisen-White et al. (2011) ﬁnd that the sets of drawings
become more structured over these chains of transmission:
the drawings develop component parts which refer to dis-
tinct aspects of meaning.
1.3. Summary of our hypotheses
Although it is hard to directly compare these experi-
ments, they nevertheless suggest a three-way contrast:
pressure for compressibility arising from transmission to
new learners results in degenerate languages ( Kirby
et al., 2008; Perfors & Navarro, 2014; Silvey et al., 2015 );
pressure for expressivity arising from communication
leads to holistic systems ( Garrod et al., 2007; Fay &
Ellison, 2013 ); pressure from both communication and
transmission leads to structure ( Theisen-White et al.,
2011), an effect which can also be achieved by transmis-
sion and an artiﬁcial pressure against degeneracy ( Kirby
et al., 2008). However, no one model or experimental para-
digm completely decouples learnability and expressivity:
below, we present a model and an experiment which do
precisely this, conclusively demonstrating the link
between expressivity, learnability and structure, and fur-
thermore showing in general how cultural evolution pro-
vides a linking mechanism by which languages can adapt
to become highly compressible and highly expressive, as
observed by Kemp and Regier (2012), Xu and Regier
(2014), Regier et al. (2015) . The novelty of our approach
lies in the explicit demonstration that cultural evolution
can lead to the emergence of language structure under
competing pressures from learning and communication.
More speciﬁcally, we can set out the following series of
predictions that can be tested using computational models
and laboratory experiments:
/C15 A pressure from learning alone will lead, over repeated
episodes of language transmission, to degenerate lan-
guages that are highly compressible, but dysfunctional
from the point of view of communication.
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 89

PAGE 5
/C15 A pressure from communication alone will lead, over
repeated episodes of communication, to holistic lan-
guages that are expressive, but incompressible.
/C15 Where both learning and communication impact on the
cultural transmission of language, we will see the emer-
gence of structured languages which are both expres-
sive and compressible.
We will set out our computational model in the next
section, and our laboratory experiment in Section 3.
These models and experiments allow us to set up counter-
factual situations where one or other pressures on the
transmission of language is removed (or at least reduced
substantially). Obviously, real language is systematically
structured – it exhibits design features like combinatorial-
ity and compositionality. It is also learned anew every gen-
eration, and used communicatively. It might appear that
testing our hypotheses outside of the lab or computer sim-
ulation is therefore impossible. However, in the last section
of the paper, we will suggest possible places to look for
tentative support in situations of real language transmis-
sion under differing social settings.
2. Model
In order to test these hypotheses we ﬁrst construct a
model of the processes of language learning and language
use, use this model to test the internal coherence of our
theory, and then test the predictions of the model in exper-
iments with human participants (described in Section 3).
Our model includes the minimal ingredients required to
test our speciﬁc hypotheses about how the link between
compressibility, expressivity and linguistic structure plays
out over cultural transmission: we have a language model,
a model of language learning, a model of language use dur-
ing communication, and a model of transmission in popu-
lations. A brief summary is provided here, and full
technical details are given in the following sections.
We lay out a very simple model of languages that
allows us to differentiate between the three language
classes mentioned in the discussion: holistic, structured
and degenerate. Following, e.g., Grifﬁths and Kalish
(2007), Reali and Grifﬁths (2009) and Culbertson and
Smolensky (2012) , we model language learning as a pro-
cess of Bayesian inference: learners infer a language or lan-
guages from observed linguistic behaviour, and we assume
that learners have a prior preference for simple, compress-
ible languages, as motivated by our assumption that such
languages are in principle easier to learn. We model com-
munication as a process of selecting an utterance to convey
a meaning to a communicative partner, and assume that
language users have a tendency to avoid utterances which
are ambiguous; the strength of this preference is deter-
mined by the parameter c, which we manipulate to
remove the pressure for expressivity (by setting c to 0)
or to include it (by setting c > 0.).
Finally, we model cultural transmission via iterated
Bayesian learning ( Grifﬁths & Kalish, 2007; Reali &
Grifﬁths, 2009; Burkett & Grifﬁths, 2010 ): the data that
forms the basis of language learning is itself the product
of language use. We compare iterated learning in two
types of population: in chains, simulated agents are organ-
ised into pairs, are trained on data produced by the previ-
ous pair (see below), and then interact to produce data
which the next generation in the chain (a new, naïve pair
of simulated individuals) are trained on. In closed groups ,
exactly the same regime of training and interaction is
observed. However, naïve individuals are not introduced
at each generation: rather, the same individuals are trained
on their own productions from the previous phase of inter-
action. This minimal difference between chains and closed
groups allows us to manipulate the pressure for learnabil-
ity. In chains, where naïve individuals are introduced at
every generation, the pressure for learnability (i.e., the
inﬂuence of the prior preference for compressible lan-
guages) is likely to be relatively strong. In closed groups
with no turnover of the population, there is only one epi-
sode of transmission to naïve individuals (at the ﬁrst point
at which the simulated agents encounter the language),
and consequently the pressure for simplicity arising from
learning is substantially diminished.
4
Manipulating population type (chain vs. closed group)
and expressivity pressure (via the parameter c) therefore
allows us to test the hypotheses outlined above: in particu-
lar, we should expect degenerate languages in chains with
c ¼ 0 (pressure for compressibility arising from learning
by naïve individuals; no pressure for expressivity); holistic
languages in closed groups with c > 0 (reduced pressure for
compressibility due to lack of transmission to naïve indi-
viduals; pressure for expressivity during communication);
and structured languages in chains with c > 0 (pressure
for compressibility arising from learning by naïve individu-
als; pressure for expressivity during communication).
The following section goes into the model in some
detail, setting out the various components outlined above
in turn: the languages, which consist of meaning-form
pairs; the hypotheses learners infer, which consist of sim-
ple grammars; the prior bias of the learners, favouring sim-
ple grammars; the process of inference; and the way in
which languages are transmitted within and between pairs
of agents (also summarised in Fig. 1 ). Readers wishing to
skip the technical details can safely move on to
Section 2.2 to see the results of the simulation model.
2.1. Details of the model
2.1.1. Languages
A language consists of a system for expressing mean-
ings using forms. We consider the simplest possible mean-
ings and forms which are nonetheless capable of
evidencing systematic structure: meanings are sets con-
taining feature-values for f features, each taking v possible
values. Similarly, forms are of strings of characters of
length l, where each character is drawn from some alpha-
bet R. We take f ¼ v ¼ l ¼j Rj¼ 2, which yields a set of
4 Another possible approach to manipulating the pressure for compress-
ibility would have been to make the learners completely unbiased.
However, we keep the bias constant and change the population type in
order to enable direct comparison with our experimental approach covered
in Section 3.
90 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 6
forms, F¼ f aa; ab; ba; bbg and a set of meanings,
M¼f 02; 12; 03; 13g, where the values for the ﬁrst feature
are drawn from f0; 1g and the second feature from f2; 3g.
This gives a space of 256 possible languages, including
degenerate, compositionally-structured and holistic map-
pings. An example degenerate language would be one that
associates each meaning with the form aa. A structured
language would be one where each aspect of the meaning
was individually and consistently mapped to a single char-
acter, for example fð02; aaÞ; ð03; abÞ; ð12; baÞ; ð13; bbÞg.
Finally, a holistic language is one in which every meaning
has a distinct form but the mapping is not compositional,
such as fð02; aaÞ; ð03; abÞ; ð12; bbÞ; ð13; baÞg.
2.1.2. Hypotheses
Learners infer a distribution over languages: the space of
hypotheses is therefore the space of possible distributions
over all 256 languages. 5 We use a Dirichlet process prior
(Burkett & Grifﬁths, 2010; Ferguson, 1973 ), characterised
Fig. 1. Simulation procedure in the chain (top) and closed group (bottom) conditions. During learning (1), agents A and B are exposed to some data and
sample a hypothesis according to PðhjdÞ. During interaction (2), the agents take turns to produce hmeaning; formi pairs according to PðdjhÞ, updating PðhjdÞ
according to their partner’s productions. The data produced by one randomly-selected agent during interaction is used (3) to train the next generati on of
agents. In chains (top) these are fresh, naïve learners; in closed groups (bottom) they are the same two agents.
5 Various other Bayesian models of language learning (e.g. Grifﬁths &
Kalish, 2007; Reali & Grifﬁths, 2009; Culbertson & Smolensky, 2012 )
assume that learners infer a single grammar. The generalisation to allowing
learners to infer a distribution over languages, rather than a single
language, follows techniques provided by Burkett and Grifﬁths (2010)
and is particularly appropriate in our case as it allows learners to track
changes in their partners’ linguistic behaviour over time.
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 91

PAGE 7
by concentration parameter a and base distribution G0. The
parameter a determines how many languages feature in this
distribution: low alpha (we use a ¼ 0:1) corresponds to an a
priori belief that the majority of the probability mass will be
on a single language. The base distribution is a distribution
over languages, and would be the prior if learners only con-
sidered single-language hypotheses.
Our base distribution encodes a preference for simplic-
ity, operationalised as a preference for languages whose
description is compressible. Intuitively, degenerate lan-
guages permit more compressed descriptions than compo-
sitional languages; holistic languages are, by deﬁnition,
incompressible. We calculate the compressibility of a lan-
guage by specifying the grammar of that language in a min-
imally redundant form (Brighton, 2002; Dowman, 1998 ).
The coding length of a grammar can then be speciﬁed as
the number of bits taken to encode it in this minimally
redundant form, which we convert into a prior probability,
as described below.
2.1.3. A compression-based prior
We treat languages as a rewrite grammar for mapping
forms and meanings, then encode that grammar in a mini-
mally redundant form and calculate the minimum number
of bits required for that coding. The probability of language
l in the base distribution is given by G0ðlÞ/ 2/C0LðlÞ where LðlÞ
is the number of bits required to code l, and we normalise
over all languages. Rewrite rules take one of two forms:
X ! YZ indicates that an item of category X rewrites to
items from categories Y and Z (in that order), and inherits
the union of the meanings of Y and Z, whereas X : M ! F,
where M is a set of possible meanings and F is a form, indi-
cates that category X rewrites to the form F and can take
any of the meanings in M. The degenerate language given
in Section 2.1.1 is described by the grammar:
S : f02; 03; 12; 13g! aa
where S is the start category for the grammar. The compo-
sitional grammar is:
S ! AB
A : 0 ! a
A : 1 ! b
B : 2 ! a
B : 3 ! b
and the holistic grammar is:
S : 02 ! aa
S : 03 ! ab
S : 12 ! bb
S : 13 ! ba
These grammars are encoded as a string of characters
that remove any unnecessary redundancies but still allow
for reconstruction of the rewrite grammars. In this case,
the three encodings are, respectively:
/C15 S02,03,12,13aa
/C15 SAB.A0a.A1b.B2a.B3b
/C15 S02aa.S03ab.S12bb.S13ba
The coding length in bits of a language l is calculated
from these strings using LðlÞ¼/C0 Pjlj
i¼1log2pðliÞ where pðliÞ
is the probability of the ith character in the code for l.
This gives code lengths for the three examples of 38.55,
55.20 and 67.29 respectively.
This prior in favour of simpler, more compressible
grammars is closely related to the work of Kemp and
Regier (2012) and Perfors, Tenenbaum, and Regier (2011) ,
who also assume that learners prefer simpler grammars,
operationalised as grammars with fewer rewrite rules
(Kemp & Regier, 2012 ) or grammars with fewer and sim-
pler rewrite rules ( Perfors et al., 2011 ), and yields an intu-
itively reasonable ranking of languages: degenerate
languages are the most compressible, compositional lan-
guages far less so, and holistic languages are the least com-
pressible of all. The table below gives coding length ( L) and
probability in the base distribution ( G0) for example lan-
guages, where the forms are given in order for meanings
02; 12; 03 and 13 respectively. (We label all languages that
are only partially holistic, compositional or degenerate as
‘‘other’’ in this table.).
type l LðlÞ G0ðlÞ
Degenerate aa aa aa aa 38.55 0.399
Degenerate ab ab ab
ab
40.55 0.100
Other aa aa aa ab 52.73 0.0000215
Other aa aa aa
bb
53.49 0.0000127
Compositional aa ab ba
bb
55.20 0.00000388
Other aa aa ab
ba
61.68 0.0000000433
Other aa aa ab
bb
62.17 0.0000000309
Holistic aa ab bb
ba
67.29 0.000000000891
2.1.4. Likelihood
To model language use, we sample a form f from the
distribution Pðf jh; tÞ, which speciﬁes the probability of f
given hypothesis h and a topic t 2M which the speaker
attempts to discriminate from the other meanings in M.
Pðf jh; tÞ¼ PðljhÞ/C1Pðf jl; tÞ: we simply sample a language l
from the speaker’s hypothesis, then given that language
and the topic, sample an utterance. We include a parame-
terisable preference to avoid ambiguity during this latter
step, following the model of pragmatics provided by
Frank and Goodman (2012) . Assuming some small proba-
bility of error on production /C15:
Pðf jl; tÞ/
1
a
/C0/C1 cð1 /C0/C15Þ if t is mapped to f in l
/C15
jF j/C01 if t is not mapped to f in l
(
;
where we normalise over all possible forms from F . a is
ambiguity, the number of meanings in M that map to form
f in l, and c speciﬁes the extent to which ambiguous utter-
ances are penalised. If a ¼ 1( f is unambiguous) and/or
92 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 8
c ¼ 0 then this yields a model of production where the
‘correct’ form is produced with probability 1 /C0/C15.
However, when c > 0 and f is ambiguous (i.e., a > 1), then
the ‘correct’ mapping from t to f is less likely to be pro-
duced (the probability Pðf jl; tÞ is reduced by the factor
1
a
/C0/C1 c) and the remaining probability mass is spread equally
over the other possible forms, leading to increased proba-
bility of producing f
0
– f . Therefore, c > 0 introduces a
penalty for languages whose utterances are ambiguous.
We use /C15 ¼ 0:05 and vary c in order to vary expressivity
pressure, as discussed above.
Given this model of production, and under the assump-
tion that topics are selected with uniform probability from
M (which is of size jMj), the probability of an individual
with hypothesis h producing a given series of
hmeaning; formi pairs d is
PðdjhÞ¼
Y
ht;f i2d
1
jMj Pðf jh; tÞ:
2.1.5. Inference
The posterior probability of h (a distribution over lan-
guages) given data d (a set of hmeaning; formi pairs) is
PðhjdÞ/ PðdjhÞ/C1PðhjG0; aÞ
where PðdjhÞ is the likelihood function provided in the pre-
vious section and PðhjG0; aÞ is the Dirichlet process prior
over h, characterised by the base distribution G0 and con-
centration parameter a. Exact inference over this hypothe-
sis space is intractable: instead, following Burkett and
Grifﬁths (2010) , we use a Gibbs sampler based on the
Chinese Restaurant Process to sample a hypothesis direct
from the posterior. As described below, learners acquire
an expanding set of observed utterances during their life-
time: we run the inference over the most recent r ¼ 80
observations, in order to improve simulation runtimes.
2.1.6. Transmission in populations
As described above, we compare two types of popula-
tion: in the chain condition, simulated agents are organised
into pairs, are trained on data produced by the previous
pair (see below), and then interact to produce data which
the next generation in the chain (a new, naïve pair of sim-
ulated individuals) are trained on. In the closed group con-
dition, exactly the same regime of training and interaction
is observed. However, naïve individuals are not introduced
at each generation: rather, the same individuals are trained
on their own productions from the previous phase of
interaction.6
During training, the pair are presented with a shared
set of b ¼ 20 meaning-form pairs, produced by the pre-
ceding pair during interaction or (for the ﬁrst generation
only) a shared set of b meaning-form pairs generated
from a randomly-selected fully-expressive holistic lan-
guage (this initialisation with holistic languages is anal-
ogous to the set up of the human experiments to
follow, but see below, and Appendix A for discussion of
an alternative initialisation). This data is added to each
agent’s memory (which will be empty for individuals in
chains), and then a hypothesis is sampled from the
posterior.
After training, the pair interact for 2 b rounds. At each
round of interaction, one individual acts as speaker and
the other as hearer. The speaker samples a single
meaning-form pair from their hypothesis according to
the likelihood function PðdjhÞ described above (i.e., a topic
t is selected at random from M, the learner samples a lan-
guage l from their hypothesis h then, given that language
and the topic, samples a form according to Pðf jl; tÞ). The
hearer adds the observed meaning-form pair to its mem-
ory, and samples an updated hypothesis from the poste-
rior. The roles of speaker and hearer then switch, and a
new round is played.
The b meaning-form pairs produced by one
randomly-selected member of the pair at generation n
are used as the training data for the pair at generation
n þ 1. See Fig. 1 for an overview of this setup.
2.2. Results
As described above, we run simulations under three
conﬁgurations of the model, manipulating population type
(chain vs. closed group) and expressivity pressure (by
manipulating c, the penalty for ambiguous utterances dur-
ing production): in the Learnability Only condition we use
the chain population type and c ¼ 0; in the Expressivity
Only condition we use closed groups with c ¼ 2; in the
Learnability And Expressivity condition we use chains with
c ¼ 2.
The results (Fig. 2) match the predictions of our hypoth-
esis. In the Learnability Only condition, the ﬁnal distribu-
tion is dominated by degenerate languages. As a result of
their repeated transmission to fresh, naïve learners, the
languages are under pressure to adapt to the learners’ prior
preference in favour of compressible languages, and given
the absence of countervailing pressures for expressivity,
the eventual distribution of languages is dominated by
the prior, which favour the most compressible languages:
the degenerate ones. In contrast, in the Expressivity Only
condition, the initial holistic languages (which are maxi-
mally expressive, providing a distinct, unambiguous form
for every meaning, but not compressible) persist. The lan-
guages in this condition are under little pressure to con-
form to the prior preference for compressibility of naïve
learners, since (after the ﬁrst ‘generation’ of learning)
members of the group approach each fresh bout of learning
with overwhelming evidence that the language they are
being exposed to is holistic, and constantly replenish their
own evidence that the language is holistic during
6 For convenience in comparing conditions, we will continue to use the
term ‘generation’ rather than the more appropriate ‘round’ for the closed
group condition. Training pairs of agents on their own productions ensures
that the conﬁguration of the model is identical for both chain and closed
group conditions. We ran an additional set of closed group simulations with
a modiﬁed transmission regime, such that pairs are trained on the initial
target language and go on to interact repeatedly but are not retrained on
their productions from the last round of interaction (i.e., there is no training
phase after generation 1): this produces results which are highly similar to
the closed group condition with retraining, showing that the retraining step
does not introduce an additional conservative tendency.
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 93

PAGE 9
interaction. Consequently, the initial holistic language is
locked in. 7
Finally, in the Learnability And Expressivity condition,
we see structured languages emerge: the ﬁnal distribution
of languages is dominated by languages which are both
expressive (in that they provide an unambiguous form
for every meaning) and yet relatively compressible
(because they are compositionally structured). These lan-
guages emerge over cultural evolution as a result of the
trade-off between the compressibility preference operat-
ing during learning and the expressivity preference operat-
ing during communication: the initial holistic languages
are highly expressive but difﬁcult for learners to acquire,
and the resulting errors made during learning lead to the
emergence of more compressible, degenerate languages;
however, the expressivity pressure imposed during lan-
guage use prevents the degenerate languages seen in the
Learnability Only condition from taking over, and conse-
quently the structured languages, which are both com-
pressible (and therefore learnable) and expressive
increase in frequency. Again, this matches our hypothesis
that structure only develops when pressures for both com-
pressibility and expressivity are in play.
The results we describe here obtain when we initialise
the simulations with a holistic language. In other words,
in line with a number of hypotheses about the nature of pro-
tolanguage (e.g., Wray, 1998 ) we assume a starting point
entirely lacking in structure: a completely incompressible
language. However, it is worth considering what would
happen if we ran our simulations from the opposite starting
point, from the most compressible rather than least com-
pressible languages. Details of this, along with other explo-
rations of the parameter space for the models, are given in
Appendix A . In contrast to the results shown in Fig. 2 ,w e
ﬁnd that compositional languages can evolve in the
Expressivity Only condition if we initialise the population
with a degenerate language (see Fig. 5 in Appendix A). The
initial degenerate languages are highly unstable due to
the expressivity pressure acting on production; however,
the noisy mix of communication systems that results from
the initial process of eliminating the degenerate starting
language provides an opportunity for the prior bias to assert
itself as the agents learn from their partner’s (variable) pro-
ductions and their own (variable) behaviour. Nevertheless,
it is clear that the crucial contrast between the
Expressivity & Learnability condition and the Expressivity
Only condition still holds: unstructured, holistic languages
never take hold in the former, where the introduction of
naïve learners provides a strong and continued pressure
against incompressible languages, whereas they constitute
a large proportion of the stable languages that emerge in the
latter condition irrespective of whether we start the simula-
tions with the most or least compressible languages.
3. Experiments
As discussed in Section 1.2, previous iterated learning
experiments with human participants have shown that
pressure for learnability alone leads to the emergence of
largely degenerate languages ( Kirby et al., 2008; Perfors
Mean proportion
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Degenerate Holistic Compositional Other
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Degenerate Holistic Compositional Other
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Degenerate Holistic Compositional Other
(a) Learnability only (b) Expressivity only (c) Learnability and expressivity
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Generation
Mean Proportion
Degenerate
Holistic
Compositional
Other
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Generation
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Generation
Fig. 2. Final distributions of languages (top; each averaged over generations 50–100 of 100 simulation runs, error bars give 95% conﬁdence intervals) and
time courses (bottom) of evolution for three different conditions. When learnability is the only pressure (a), degenerate languages dominate the ﬁn al
distribution, reﬂecting the prior bias of the learners. When expressivity is the only pressure (b), the original expressive but holistic languages a re preserved.
When both pressures are at play (c), expressive but compositionally-structured languages emerge.
7 Note also that this result holds despite the fact that we set a fairly low
memory limit for individuals ( r ¼ 80) – even if we reduce the memory limit
further, so that individual’s memory is stretches back only as far as it would
for a single generation in the chain condition ( r ¼ 40) we still fail to observe
any dominance of structured language. See Appendix A for more details of
manipulations of model parameters.
94 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 10
& Navarro, 2014; Silvey et al., 2015 ), matching the predic-
tions of our model. In order to test the remaining predic-
tions, we developed an experimental method that
introduces a natural expressivity pressure arising from
communication. Following our modelling approach, we
test two conditions: in the chain condition, each generation
consists of a pair of participants, who are trained on the
same target language and subsequently engage in a com-
municative task, as described below. The utterances that
these participants produce during their interaction then
form the training data for the next generation in the chain,
consisting of a fresh pair of naïve participants. In the closed
group condition, the same pair of participants remain in the
lab throughout, and are re-trained on their own commu-
nicative output. The training, communication, and trans-
mission steps are therefore identical across conditions,
the two conditions differing only in whether naïve partic-
ipants are introduced at each generation. In line with the
model, and previous experiments, in every case we start
with the least structured, least compressible random holis-
tic languages. The logic behind these two experimental
conditions is identical to that outlined for the model in
the previous section: we should expect holistic languages
to persist in closed groups (reduced pressure for compress-
ibility due to lack of transmission to naïve individuals;
pressure for expressivity during communication); and
structured languages in chains (pressure for compressibil-
ity arising from learning by naïve individuals; pressure
for expressivity during communication).
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants
A total of 60 student participants (41 female) were
recruited through a University of Edinburgh Student And
Graduate Employment service, which advertises tempo-
rary employment opportunities for Edinburgh students.
Participants were paid at an hourly rate of £6. This exper-
iment was run concurrently with two others, and the pair
of participants (from all three experiments) who achieved
the highest score in the shortest time received a £25 cash
prize. The participants were informed of this in the
instructions.
3.1.2. Stimuli and initial languages
Participants were asked to learn a language in which
strings of letters (signals) were paired with abstract pic-
tures (meanings). Meanings were drawn from a set of
twelve and varied along two dimensions: shape and ﬁll
texture. There were three distinct shapes, and four distinct
textures. In addition, each of the 12 ﬁlled shapes had a
unique appendage: the meanings could be described either
by referring to these appendages as 12 completely distinct
objects, or by referring to a combination of their shape and
texture. See Fig. 3 for the full set of meanings.
The initial signals were generated by concatenating 2, 3
or 4 CV syllables, selected randomly with replacement
from a set of nine syllables (following the procedure used
by Kirby et al., 2008 ). For each run of the experiment, this
set of nine syllables was selected randomly without
replacement from a larger set composed of all possible
combinations of 8 consonants g, h, k, l, m, n, p, w and 5
vowels a, e, i, o, u. Initial signals were examined and
excluded if they contained forms resembling English.
Signals were then randomly paired with meanings, and
candidate languages thus generated were analysed for
structure using the structure measure described below,
and were rejected if they returned a signiﬁcant level of
structure. This ensured that the languages given to the ﬁrst
generation of learners were genuinely unstructured with
Fig. 3. The language produced at the last generation of a closed group (top) and a chain (bottom). Hyphens added for clarity.
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 95

PAGE 11
regards to the mapping between signals and meanings.
Later generations learnt from the signals produced by the
participants in the previous generation, with no restric-
tions placed upon their composition.
3.1.3. Procedure
The two participants within a pair were trained sepa-
rately, at two networked computers, with exactly the same
learning stimuli. Each generation experienced a training
phase, during which participants simply observed the
meanings and their associated signals (as text) presented
on the computer screen, and a playing phase . Participants
underwent six blocks of training during the training phase:
within a single block, each meaning-signal pair appeared
once, in random order, with the meaning appearing on
screen ﬁrst (for 1 s) followed by the meaning plus its asso-
ciated signal (for a further 5 s).
In the playing phase, the participants took turns as
speaker and hearer in a series of communication trials. In
each trial, the speaker sees one meaning (the topic), and
has to type a signal to identify it for the hearer. The hearer
sees a context array of six different meanings (including
the topic), plus the speaker’s signal, and attempts to select
the topic, using the mouse. At this point, both speaker and
hearer are given feedback: the hearer sees what the correct
topic was, and the speaker sees what the hearer picked. If
the communication has been successful and the hearer has
selected the intended topic, a point is added to the pair’s
collective score. In total, each participant acts as speaker
and hearer twice for each meaning.
In order to transmit the language to the next pair of par-
ticipants in a chain (or to retrain the same pair in the
closed-group condition), the second utterances produced
by one participant (randomly selected from the pair) are
collected and used as the training language in the next
generation. Utterances from a single participant, rather
than a mixture of utterances from both, were transmitted
to the next generation following existing iterated learning
experiments, where input to each participant was pro-
duced by a single person. Thus, any potential effects of
mixing the input were avoided. We ran four transmission
chains and six closed groups, each starting with a different
initial language and consisting of six generations.
3.2. Results
Success was quantiﬁed as the number of successful
interactions during play (i.e., interactions where the hearer
successfully identiﬁed the topic). The maximum success
score is 48 (two blocks of 24 interactions). Transmission
error and structure at generation n were evaluated based
on the labels that would be used when training generation
n þ 1 (i.e., we applied these measures to the language pro-
duced by one participant in each pair). Following the tech-
niques used in Kirby et al. (2008) , transmission error was
quantiﬁed as the normalised Levenshtein distance between
the trained signal associated with a given meaning and the
signal produced during play for that meaning, averaging
across all meanings. The normalised Levenshtein distance
is the number of characters that need to be changed,
inserted or deleted to transform one character string into
another divided by the length of the longest string.
Structure was quantiﬁed as the z-score of the Mantel
test ( Mantel, 1967 ) between signal-similarities
(measured using normalised Levenshtein distance) and
meaning-similarities (measured using Hamming distance
– the number of features that are different between the
two meanings), following the technique used in Kirby
et al. (2008) . High structure scores indicate languages in
which distance between pairs of meanings correlates with
the distance between their associated signals to a degree
unlikely to arise by chance (speciﬁcally, p <: 05 when the
structure scores is greater than 1.96). In other words, simi-
lar meanings are associated with similar signals, as
observed in compositional languages.
These variables were submitted to mixed-design
ANOVAs with Generation as a within-subjects factor (cap-
turing the fact that the languages produced within a single
chain are not independent) and Transmission Condition
(chain or closed-group) as a between-subjects factor. We
used Page’s test of trend ( Page, 1963) to test for cumulative
changes in success, error and structure over generations.
Fig. 3 gives example ﬁnal languages in both conditions,
and Fig. 4 shows the results of our three measures.
For success, there was a main effect of Transmission
Condition (i.e., chain vs. closed group: F(1,8) = 11.5, p =
.009): success was higher in the closed group ( M = 41.94,
SD = 16.22) than chain ( M = 30.36, SD = 14.65) conditions.
There was a main effect of Generation ( F(5,40) = 10.51,
p < .001), but no interaction (F(5,40) = 1.83, p = .13): success
at Generation 6 was higher than at Generation 1 (t(9) = 4.62,
p = .001), and increases cumulatively over generations
(Page’s L = 910, m = 10, n =6 , p<.01).
For error, there was a main effect of Transmission
Condition ( F(1,8) = 10.76, p = .011), with higher error in
the chain ( M = 0.22, SD = 0.17) than in the closed group
condition ( M = 0.12, SD = 0.12). There was also a main
effect of Generation ( F(5,40) = 13.64, p < .001), and a signif-
icant interaction ( F(5,40) = 3.61, p = .009). While t-tests
comparing error at ﬁrst and last generations suggest a sig-
niﬁcant decrease in Error in the closed group condition
(t(5) = 10.53, p < .001), but not in the chain condition,
(t(3) = 1.01, p = .38), error decreases cumulatively over
generations in both the chain ( L = 333, m =4 , n =6 ,
p<.01), and closed group ( L = 516, m =6 , n =6 , p < .001)
conditions. Independent-samples t-tests at each genera-
tion show that error is lower in the closed group conditions
at generation 2 ( t(8) = 3.591, p = .007) but not elsewhere
(t(8) < 2.3, p P .051, n.s. with corrected alpha of 0.008):
this explains the Generation /C2Transmission interaction
in the ANOVA, but is not theoretically interesting.
For structure, there was a main effect of Generation
(F(6,48) = 12.47, p < .001) and Transmission Condition
(F(1,8) = 18.03, p = .003) and a signiﬁcant interaction
(F(6,48) = 8.10, p < .001). Structure cumulatively increases
over generations in the chain condition ( L = 534, m =4 ,
n =7 , p < .001), yielding higher structure at generation 6
than generation 0 ( t(3) = 4.493, p = .021) but does not
increase in the closed-group condition ( L = 708, m =6 ,
n =6 , p = .38; t-tests indicate no difference between struc-
ture at generation 0 and 6, t(5) = 1.359, p = .232).
Independent-samples t-tests show that there is no
96 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 12
difference in Structure between conditions at generation 0
(t(8) = 0.28, p = .79), but a highly signiﬁcant difference at
generation 6 ( t(8) = 4.96, p = .001). Moreover, from genera-
tion 3 onwards, the mean Structure score in the chain con-
dition is well above 1.96, indicating that the languages
which develop in chains are signiﬁcantly more structured
than expected by chance: in contrast, no language attains
this level of structure in the closed group condition.
3.3. Experiment discussion
As discussed earlier, in previous iterated learning exper-
iments where there is only a learnability pressure, lan-
guages become less and less expressive over time ( Kirby
et al., 2008 ). However, here we see languages that main-
tain their expressivity (see Fig. 3 for an example of the ﬁnal
language from each condition). In other words, transmis-
sion of a language through iterated learning in the pres-
ence of a communicative task appears to be sufﬁcient for
the emergence of expressive languages, which provide a
distinct label for every object.
The languages also become more stable as a result of
their transmission, as indicated by the cumulative decrease
in error in both conditions. However, the mechanisms driv-
ing this reduction in error differ between conditions. In the
closed group condition, error decreases as participants
become more and more experienced in using the initial
holistic language they are provided with: repeated training
and use allows them to master this language, and conse-
quently the language changes relatively little. In the chain
condition, however, participants do not have the beneﬁt of
repeated rounds of training and interaction: every partici-
pant is trained and plays just once. The decrease in error is
therefore driven not by increasing familiarity of the partic-
ipants with a relatively ﬁxed language, but by the language
changing to become more learnable. This is the same
process of cultural evolution for learnability that we have
previously seen in models ( Brighton, Kirby, & Smith,
2005a) and experiments ( Kirby et al., 2008 ). This is
illustrated in Fig. 4d , where we track distance from the
initial language: a 2 /C26 mixed ANOVA reveals a main
effect of Generation ( F(1.618,12.947) = 20.29, p < .001),
Transmission Condition ( F(1,8) = 7.78, p = .024), and a sig-
niﬁcant interaction ( F(1.618,12.947) = 12.07, p = .002).
The main effect of Generation is due to languages becom-
ing increasingly different from the initial language over
123456
(a) Success
Generation
Score
18 24 30 36 42 48 Chain
Closed grp
123456
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
(b) Error
Generation
Norm. edit-distance
Chain
Closed grp
0123456
-2 0 2 4 6
(c) Structure
Generation
Z-score
Chain
Closed grp
123456
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
(d) Change from init. lang.
Generation
Edit-dist from initial lang. Chain
Closed grp
Fig. 4. The effects of Generation and Transmission Condition (chain or closed-group) on (a) communicative success, (b) transmission error, and (c)
structure. 95% conﬁdence intervals shown. The 1.96 level, corresponding to p = .05, for Structure is shown as a dashed line in (c). In addition, normalised
distance from the initial language is shown in (d). Structure increases over generations only in the chain condition.
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 97

PAGE 13
generations. This increase is cumulative ( L = 885, m = 10,
n =6 , p<.001). The main effect of Transmission Condition
is due to languages being more different from the initial
language in the chain ( M = 0.56, SD = 0.15) than the closed
group ( M = 0.36, SD = 0.11) condition. Distance from the
initial language increases cumulatively in both conditions
(chain: m =4 , n =6 , L = 364, p < .001; closed group: m =6 ,
n =6 , L = 521, p < .001). However, independent-samples
t-tests comparing across condition at each generation
reveal a signiﬁcant difference at Generations 5
(t(3) = 6.72; p = .006) and 6 ( t(3) = 8.07; p = .004).
As the results for Structure show, mode of transmission
(chain versus closed group) has a substantial impact on the
structure of the evolving languages. In the chain condition,
languages are under pressure to be both expressive and
learnable: the solution to this problem is for them to exhi-
bit a simple compositional structure, which our structure
score picks up on. This compositional structure can be seen
in Fig. 3 (bottom): this language marks shape in the ﬁrst
part of the word, ﬁll-pattern in the second, with white ﬁll
receiving null marking: a simple and elegant solution to
the challenge of being both expressive and learnable. In
contrast, we see no increase in structure in the closed
group condition: the initial holistic structure is largely pre-
served, due to the reduced pressure for learnability associ-
ated with having the same two participants repeatedly
interact with each other.
Our experiments can only explore a small region of the
entire space of possible parameters, a space that we are
able to explore more fully in simulation (see Appendix
A). We have focussed on one particular set of meanings, a
particular training and interaction regime, and have used
holistic languages as initial input. It would be interesting
to see if, in line with the model predictions, more compo-
sitional languages might emerge in closed groups if degen-
erate languages were used as the initial input (although it
is possible that the demand characteristics of such training
would be somewhat peculiar, since participants would
need to be trained extensively on a single word). Scaling
up to larger meaning spaces (i.e., containing more than
12 meanings), necessitating larger languages, would also
be potentially revealing: we suspect that larger languages
will increase the pressure for compressibility, especially
in chains (cf. the additional results presented in the
Appendix showing that decreasing the amount of training
data while holding language size constant increases the
pressure for compressibility, which is in line with the pre-
diction). However, expanding the language in this way
would pose practical problems for the closed groups purely
in terms of the length of experiment required.
4. Conclusions
Our experimental results conﬁrm the predictions of our
model exactly. A pressure for expressivity or compressibil-
ity alone does not lead to the emergence of structure: only
when both pressures are at play does structure reliably
emerge. Crucially, we have shown that cultural evolution
is a mechanism that can deliver a structured linguistic sys-
tem where these two pressures from communication and
learning interact.
In this paper, we have equated the expressivity pressure
with communication and compressibility with learning.
The bias we have used in our model is grounded in the gen-
eral, domain-independent, principle that cognition favours
simplicity ( Chater & Vitanyi, 2003 ). An alternative
approach might be to include the expressivity pressure as
part of the bias of learners, e.g. as preferences for clarity
(Slobin, 1977 ), transparency ( Langacker, 1977 ), or isomor-
phism (Haiman, 1980). However, the experimental data we
review in Section 1.2 shows that iterated learning in
human participants leads to the emergence of degenerate
languages (i.e., languages which are highly compressible
but not highly expressive). This suggests that learning
biases favouring expressive languages are weak relative
to the biases in favour of compressibility, at least in the
types of task which are amenable to iterated learning
designs with human participants. Compressibility pres-
sures could also apply during language use. For example,
Piantadosi et al. (2012) note that frequent forms are easier
to process; highly compressible languages have fewer,
more frequent items than less compressible languages,
and are therefore more useable in this sense. Again though,
the experimental data we present in this paper (speciﬁ-
cally, that from closed groups) suggests that the compres-
sion pressures which apply during use are relatively weak
compared to the expressivity pressures enforcing distinc-
tiveness. Finally, it is worth noting that compressibility
and expressivity biases can push in the same direction in
some circumstances, e.g. in the task employed by
Fedzechkina, Jaeger, and Newport (2012) , where learners
change languages in ways that improve compressibility
and (potential) communicative function. While further
consideration of exactly when compression and expression
pressures apply would certainly be worthwhile, we never-
theless think that our approach, to assume that these pres-
sures apply primarily during learning (for compressibility)
and use (for expressivity), is a reasonable ﬁrst step.
Our ﬁndings also make sense of the distribution of
structure in the communication systems of non-human
animals. Many small but expressive communication sys-
tems exist in nature, a classic example being alarm calling
systems, which allow the discrimination of several refer-
ents (predators), but do so using vocalisations which are
holistic and unlearned ( Fitch, 2000 ). Learned vocal com-
munication systems are witnessed in many species of bird,
as well as being patchily distributed among mammals
(Fitch, 2000): strikingly, song, the classic example of (com-
binatorial, not compositional) structure in animal commu-
nication, occurs in precisely these species, whose
communication system is under cultural selection to be
learnable and expressive. This is entirely consistent with
the predictions of our model, although we would suggest
that the expressivity pressures inherent in communication
in these species must be rather different from the
expressivity pressure in language. In human communica-
tion, the pressure to be expressive derives from the need
to discriminate between potential referents in a context
of communication, whereas in birdsong a pressure for
expressivity may derive from the need to signal individual
quality through a large song/syllable repertoire ( Collins,
2004).
98 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 14
Our results suggest that the appearance of structure in
human language is not inevitable. If there are factors that
inﬂuence the relative strength of the pressure to be expres-
sive and the pressure to be compressible, then the exis-
tence of the structural design features of language may
not be universal. Speciﬁcally, our models and experiments
demonstrate that, in addition to the need to communicate,
structure emerges as language is repeatedly transmitted to
naïve learners. There is some suggestive evidence that
structure in language can be modulated by the composi-
tion of populations. For example, there are apparent differ-
ences in the structure of emerging sign languages
depending on the type of population they emerge in.
Meir, Sandler, Padden, and Aronoff (2010) contrast
Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language, which emerged in a vil-
lage with a high incidence of congenital deafness, and
Israeli Sign Language, which arose through contact
between many deaf learners brought together in schools
and clubs. The latter, like most sign languages, exhibits
combinatorial structure in its sign inventory, whereas the
former surprisingly appears to lack this structural design
feature. Similarly, Lupyan and Dale (2010) show that the
complexity of morphological structure in language is
inversely correlated with size of population. We suggest
that examining the impact of naïve learners on the trans-
mission of language might make sense of these ﬁndings.
For example, in contexts where there is frequent transmis-
sion of language between individuals that do not share a
long interaction history (cf. Wray & Grace, 2007 ), where
adult second-language learners are involved in transmis-
sion ( Lupyan & Dale, 2010 ), or where language emerges
through transmission between child learners ( Meir et al.,
2010), we expect languages to exhibit greater structure.
This work provides a new approach to understanding
the structural design features of human language.
Cultural evolution responds to a pressure for language to
be expressive, driven by the fact that it is used for commu-
nication, and a pressure for language to be compressible,
driven by the fact that it needs to be learned in order to
be transmitted over multiple generations. Linguistic struc-
ture is the result.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ESRC Grant No.
RES-062-23-1537 and by AHRC Grant No. AH/F017677/1.
These funding bodies were not involved in the study
design; collection, analysis or interpretation of data; writ-
ing of the report; or the decision to submit the article for
publication. The software for the experiment was created
by Sean Roberts (see Roberts, 2012 ). Many thanks to Amy
Perfors, Padraic Monaghan and 2 anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments.
Appendix A. Manipulating model parameters
The results presented in the main text were for simula-
tion runs which were initialised with holistic languages.
This assumption is consistent with most previous iterated
learning models and experiments (e.g. Kirby, 2002;
Brighton et al., 2005b; Kirby et al., 2008; Perfors &
Navarro, 2014; Silvey et al., 2015 ) and with the argument
that, in common with the communication systems of most
non-human animals, proto-linguistic systems are likely to
have been holistic ( Wray, 1998 ). Initialising our model
with degenerate languages 8 instead yields a pattern of
results ( Fig. 5 ) which are slightly different from the results
presented in the main text, but still consistent with our the-
ory and hypotheses. As can be seen in Fig. 5 , initialising
chains with degenerate languages has very little impact on
the ﬁnal distribution of languages: the inﬂuence of the initial
language quickly disappears as the language is ﬁltered
repeatedly through fresh learners, and the ﬁnal distribution
of languages is determined by the prior (when
c ¼ 0) or the
trade-off between the prior and the expressivity pressure
(when c ¼ 2). The picture is more complex in closed groups
with an expressivity pressure ( c ¼ 2, equivalent to our
Expressivity Only condition described above): here, rather
than the initial degenerate languages being preserved, a
mix of holistic and compositional languages emerge. Due
to the expressivity pressure acting on production, the initial
degenerate languages are highly unstable: users avoid pro-
ducing the ambiguous utterances provided by such lan-
guages and instead produce forms at random. When they
subsequently attempt to update their inferred language
from this noisy data (either while learning from their part-
ner’s random productions during interaction, or at the epi-
sodes of inter-‘generation’ transmission), due to the
uninformativeness of their data, their prior preference for
compressibility inﬂuences their choice of language; conse-
quently, holistic languages are penalised and compositional
languages are favoured as pairs begin to settle on a ﬁnal,
stable language. However, consistent with our theory, the
inﬂuence of the prior in closed groups is still signiﬁcantly
lower than in chains: holistic languages, although being a
priori many orders of magnitude less likely than composi-
tional languages (see table in Section 2.1.3), are still com-
mon in the ﬁnal languages emerging in these closed groups.
In addition to the initial languages, there are various
other parameters which determine the behaviour of the
simulation model, speciﬁcally: c (which determines the
extent to which users avoid ambiguous utterances during
language use, set to 0 or 2 for the results reported in the
body of the paper); /C15 (the noise parameter on language
use, set to 0.05 for the results reported in the body of the
paper); b (the number of times each agent produces during
interaction and therefore the number of data items passed
on to the next generation during transmission, set to 20 for
the results reported in the body of the paper);
a (the con-
centration parameter in the Dirichlet Process prior over
language distributions, inﬂuencing whether learners a pri-
ori expect to infer a single language or multiple languages,
set to 0.1 for the results reported in the body of the paper);
r (the sliding memory window, determining the number of
data items which inﬂuence inference, set to 80 for the
results reported in the body of the paper). We brieﬂy
report the results of manipulating these parameters below:
while the details of the simulation results presented in the
8 We thank Amy Perfors and an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 99

PAGE 15
body of the paper depend on the precise parameter set-
tings used, manipulating these parameters simply serves
to alter the balance between pressures for expressivity
and compressibility; consequently, the overall pattern of
results arising from manipulating these parameters is con-
sistent with our theory that structured languages only reli-
ably emerge when pressures for expressivity and
compressibility are at play.
A.1. Manipulating c, penalty for ambiguity
Reducing c weakens the pressure for expressive lan-
guages and therefore increases the relative inﬂuence of
the prior leading, ultimately, to the dominance of degener-
ate languages seen in chains where c ¼ 0. The effects of
reducing c are more muted in closed groups, due to the
reduced inﬂuence of the prior in closed groups: for
instance, c ¼ 1 in chains results in degenerate languages
dominating; however, in closed groups holistic languages
still dominate at c ¼ 1, although some compositional lan-
guages do emerge. Increasing c above 2 serves to increase
the penalty on languages containing ambiguous forms, but
since such languages are already rare this has relatively lit-
tle impact in chains or closed groups.
A.2. Manipulating /C15, noise on production
Increasing /C15 increases the inﬂuence of the prior, since
data becomes less informative as to the language which
generated it, although these effects are modest.
Increasing /C15 has little effect in chains when c ¼ 0, since
the behaviour here is entirely governed by the prior
anyway. Increasing /C15 (e.g. to 0.2) in chains when c ¼ 2
leads to a modest increase in the number of degenerate
languages; increasing /C15 (e.g. to 0.2) in closed groups when
c ¼ 2 leads to a modest increase in the number of compo-
sitional languages, as the inﬂuence of the prior is slightly
increased relative to the expressivity pressure.
A.3. Manipulating b, size of transmission bottleneck
Reducing b increases the inﬂuence of the prior, since
learners have less data; increasing b reduces the inﬂuence
of the prior, since learners have more data. These manipu-
lations have little effect in chains when c ¼ 0. In closed
groups with c ¼ 2, reducing b (e.g. to 10) leads to the emer-
gence of some compositional languages, since the inﬂu-
ence of the prior increases relative to the inﬂuence of
expressivity pressures; increasing b (e.g. to 40) has little
effect. In chains with c ¼ 2, reducing b (e.g. to 10) increases
the inﬂuence of the prior, leading to the emergence of
some degenerate languages, again due to the increased
inﬂuence of the prior; increasing b (e.g. to 40) leads to
the retention and emergence of some holistic languages,
as the expressivity pressure begins to outweigh the inﬂu-
ence of the prior.
A.4. Manipulating a, concentration parameter of the Dirichlet
process prior
Manipulating a, which determines the peakiness of an
individual’s hypothesised distribution over languages
(low values of a favour inferring hypotheses which place
the vast majority of the probability mass on one or two
Mean proportion
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Degenerate Holistic Compositional Other
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Degenerate Holistic Compositional Other
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Degenerate Holistic Compositional Other
(a) Chain, =0 (b) Closed group, =2 (c) Chain, =2
0 20 40 60 80 100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Generation
Mean Proportion
Degenerate
Holistic
Compositional
Other
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Generation
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Generation
Fig. 5. Simulation runs starting from degenerate languages. Final distributions of languages (top; each averaged over generations 50–100 of 100 simulatio n
runs, error bars give 95% conﬁdence intervals) and time courses (bottom) of evolution for three different conditions. Initialising the simulation r uns with
degenerate languages makes little difference in chains, but leads to a mix of compositional and holistic languages in closed groups, due to the inﬂuen ce of
the prior as the degenerate languages are abandoned.
100 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102

PAGE 16
languages; higher values of a lead to hypotheses featuring
many languages), indirectly manipulates the inﬂuence of
the preference for compressibility built into the prior: as
shown by Burkett and Grifﬁths (2010) , iterated Bayesian
learning converges to distributions of languages which
are determined by the base distribution when a is set high
enough. Consequently, increasing a leads to the emergence
of more degenerate languages in chains: such languages
are already common in chains when c ¼ 0; increasing a
in chains where c ¼ 2 leads to a reduction in the number
of compositional languages and more degenerate lan-
guages emerging, as the balance between compressibility
and expressivity is shifted in favour of compressibility;
for e.g.
a ¼ 1 the expressivity pressure is completely over-
come and degenerate languages dominate. In closed
groups, manipulating a also has the tendency to increase
the inﬂuence of the prior, but since the prior has less inﬂu-
ence in closed groups (as discussed above, due to the lack
of transmission to naïve individuals) the effects are more
muted: increasing a means that the ﬁnal languages in
closed groups can be either holistic or compositional, with
holistic languages being more frequent for low a (as in the
results reported in Fig. 2 ) and compositional languages
becoming more frequent as a increases (e.g. holistic and
compositional languages are equally frequent in closed
groups for a ¼ 1).
A.5. Manipulating r, memory size
Reducing r has very little effect on chains. In closed
groups, reducing r increases the inﬂuence of the prior,
since learners retain and are inﬂuenced by relatively little
data; consequently, for low enough r (e.g. r ¼ 20), the dif-
ference between closed groups and chains disappears and
structured languages emerge in closed groups with c > 0,
due to the trade-off between compressibility and expres-
sivity pressures discussed in the body of the paper.
References
Berwick, R., Okanoya, K., Beckers, G., & Bolhuis, J. (2011). Songs to syntax:
The linguistics of birdsong. Trends in Cognitive Science, 15 (3), 13–121 .
Brighton, H. (2002). Compositional syntax from cultural transmission.
Artiﬁcial Life, 8 , 25–54 .
Brighton, H., Kirby, S., & Smith, K. (2005a). Cultural selection for
learnability: Three principles underlying the view that language
adapts to be learnable. In M. Tallerman (Ed.), Language origins:
Perspectives on evolution (pp. 291–309). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Brighton, H., Smith, K., & Kirby, S. (2005b). Language as an evolutionary
system. Physics of Life Reviews, 2 , 177–226 .
Burkett, D., & Grifﬁths, T. L. (2010). Iterated learning of multiple languages
from multiple teachers. In A. D. M. Smith, M. Schouwstra, B. de Boer, &
K. Smith (Eds.), The evolution of language: Proceedings of the 8th
international conference (pp. 58–65). Singapore: Word Scientiﬁc .
Chater, N., & Vitanyi, P. (2003). Simplicity: A unifying principle in
cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7 , 19–22 .
Christiansen, M., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as shaped by the brain.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31 , 489–509 .
Collier, K., Bickel, B., van Schaik, C., Manser, M., & Townsend, S. (2014).
Language evolution: Syntax before phonology? Proceedings of the
Royal Society B, 281 (20140263).
Collins, S. (2004). Vocal ﬁghting and ﬂirting: The functions of birdsong. In
P. Marler & H. Slabbekoorn (Eds.), Nature’s music: The science of
birdsong. Academic Press .
Culbertson, J., & Smolensky, P. (2012). A Bayesian model of biases in
artiﬁcial language learning: The case of a word order universal.
Cognitive Science, 36 , 1468–1498 .
De Boer, B., & Zuidema, W. (2010). Multi-agent simulations of the
evolution of combinatorial phonology. Adaptive Behavior, 18 (2),
141–154 .
Dowman, M. (1998). A cross-linguistic computational investigation of the
learnability of syntactic, morpho-syntactic, and phonological
structure. Research report, Centre for Cognitive Science, University
of Edinburgh, < http://www.lel.ed.ac.uk//C24mdowman/EUCCS-RP-
1998-6.pdf>.
DuBois, J. (1987). The discourse basis of ergativity. Language, 64, 805–855 .
Everett, D. L. (2005). Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in
Pirahã. Current Anthropology, 46 , 621–646 .
Fay, N., & Ellison, M. E. (2013). The cultural evolution of human
communication systems in different sized populations: Usability
trumps learnability. PLoS one, 8 (8), e71781 .
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (2010). The interactive
evolution of human communication systems. Cognitive Science, 34 ,
351–386 .
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012). Language learners
restructure their input to facilitate efﬁcient communication. PNAS,
109(44), 17897–17902 .
Ferguson, T. (1973). A Bayesian analysis of some nonparametric problems.
The Annals of Statistics, 1 , 209–230 .
Ferrer i Cancho, R., Hernandez-Fernandez, A., Lusseau, D., Agoromoorthy,
G., Hsu, M. J., & Semple, S. (2013). Compression as a universal
principle of animal behavior. Cognitive Science, 37 , 1565–1578 .
Ferrer i Cancho, R., & Solé, R. (2003). Least effort and the origins of scaling
in human language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100(3), 788 .
Fitch, W. T. (2000). The evolution of speech: A comparative review. Trends
in Cognitive Science, 4 (3), 258–267 .
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic reasoning in
language games. Science, 336 , 998 .
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T. (2007). Foundations
of representation: Where might graphical symbol systems come
from? Cognitive Science, 31 (6), 961–987 .
Givón, T. (1979). On understanding grammar . Academic Press .
Gomez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (2000). Infant artiﬁcial language learning and
language acquisition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4 (5), 178–186 .
Grifﬁths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2007). Language evolution by iterated
learning with Bayesian agents. Cognitive Science, 31 , 441–480 .
Haiman, J. (1980). The iconicity of grammar: Isomorphism and
motivation. Language, 56 (3), 515–540 .
Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientiﬁc American, 203 , 88–96 .
Jäger, G. (2007). Evolutionary game theory and typology: A case study.
Language, 83 (1), 74–109 .
Kemp, C., & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across languages reﬂect
general communicative principles. Science, 336 , 1049–1054 .
Kirby, S. (1997). Competing motivations and emergence: Explaining
implicational hierarchies. Language Typology, 1 (1), 5–32 .
Kirby, S. (1999). Function, selection and innateness: The emergence of
language universals . Oxford: Oxford University Press .
Kirby, S. (2002). Learning, bottlenecks and the evolution of recursive
syntax. In E. Briscoe (Ed.), Linguistic evolution through language
acquisition: Formal and computational models (pp. 173–203).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in
the laboratory: An experimental approach to the origins of structure
in human language. PNAS, 105 (31), 10681–10686 .
Kirby, S., Grifﬁths, T. L., & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated learning and the
evolution of language. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 28 , 108–114 .
Langacker, R. W. (1977). Syntactic reanalysis. In C. N. Li (Ed.), Mechanisms
of syntactic change (pp. 57–139). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press .
Lupyan, G., & Dale, R. (2010). Language structure is partly determined by
social structure. PLoS one, 5 (1), e8559 .
Mantel, N. (1967). The detection of disease clustering and a generalized
regression approach. Cancer Research, 27 , 209–220 .
Meir, I., Sandler, W., Padden, C., & Aronoff, M. (2010). Emerging sign
languages. In M. Marschark & P. Spencer (Eds.). Oxford handbook of
deaf studies, language, and education (Vol. 2, pp. 267–280). Oxford:
Oxford University Press .
Mesoudi, A., & Whiten, A. (2008). The multiple roles of cultural
transmission experiments in understanding human cultural
evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363 ,
3489–3501
.
Oudeyer, P.-Y. (2006). Self-organization in the evolution of speech . Oxford
University Press .
S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102 101

PAGE 17
Page, E. B. (1963). Ordered hypotheses for multiple treatments: A
signiﬁcance test for linear ranks. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 58 (301), 216–230 .
Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. J. (2014). Language evolution can be shaped by
the structure of the world. Cognitive science, 38 (4), 775–793 .
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J., & Regier, T. (2011). The learnability of absract
syntactic principles. Cognition, 118 , 306–338 .
Piantadosi, S., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The communicative function of
ambiguity in language. Cognition, 122 , 280–291 .
Reali, F., & Grifﬁths, T. L. (2009). The evolution of frequency distributions:
Relating regularization to inductive biases through iterated learning.
Cognition, 111 , 317–328 .
Regier, T., Kemp, C., & Kay, P. (2015). Word meanings across languages
support efﬁcient communication. In B. MacWhinney & W. O’Grady
(Eds.), The handbook of language emergence (pp. 237–264). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley .
Roberts, S. (2012). The iterated learning model server: Technical report.
Tech. rep., Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit:
Edinburgh, UK, < http://www.lel.ed.ac.uk/lec/ilms/>.
Scott-Phillips, T., & Kirby, S. (2010). Language evolution in the laboratory.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 14 (9), 411–417 .
Silvey, C., Kirby, S., & Smith, K. (2015). Word meanings evolve to
selectively preserve distinctions on salient dimensions. Cognitive
Science, 39 , 212–226 .
Slobin, D. I. (1977). Language change in childhood and history. In J.
Macnamara (Ed.), Language learning and thought (pp. 185–221).
London: Academic Press .
Theisen-White, C., Kirby, S., & Oberlander, J. (2011). Integrating the
horizontal and vertical cultural transmission of novel communication
systems. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society
(pp. 956–961). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society .
Verhoef, T. (2012). The origins of duality of patterning in artiﬁcial
whistled languages. Language and Cognition, 4 (4), 357–380 .
von Frisch, K. (1975). The dance language and orientation of bees . Harvard
University, MA: Harvard University Press .
Wedel, A. (2012). Lexical contrast maintenance and the organization of
sublexical contrast systems. Language and Cognition, 4 (4), 319–355 .
Wray, A. (1998). Protolanguage as a holistic system for social interaction.
Language and Communication, 18 , 47–67 .
Wray, A., & Grace, G. W. (2007). The consequences of talking to strangers:
Evolutionary corollaries of socio-cultural inﬂuences on linguistic
form. Lingua, 117 (3), 543–578 .
Xu, Y., & Regier, T. (2014). Numeral systems across languages support
efﬁcient communication: From approximate numerosity to recursion.
In Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the cognitive science
society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society .
Zipf, G. (1936). The psychobiology of language . London: Routledge .
Zipf, G. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of least effort . New York:
Addison-Wesley.
Zuidema, W., & De Boer, B. (2009). The evolution of combinatorial
phonology. Journal of Phonetics, 37 (2), 125–144 .
102 S. Kirby et al. / Cognition 141 (2015) 87–102