PAGE 1
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Cognition
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cognit
Original Articles
Compositional structure can emerge without generational transmission
Limor Raviva,⁎
, Antje Meyera,b, Shiri Lev-Aria,c
aMax Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
bRadboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands
cRoyal Holloway University of London, Egham, UK
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Language evolution
Iterated learning
Communication
Input variability
Artificial language experiments
Compositionality
ABSTRACT
Experimental work in the field of language evolution has shown that novel signal systems become more
structured over time. In a recent paper, Kirby, Tamariz, Cornish, and Smith (2015) argued that compositional
languages can emerge only when languages are transmitted across multiple generations. In the current paper, we
show that compositional languages can emerge in a closed community within a single generation. We conducted
a communication experiment in which we tested the emergence of linguistic structure in different micro-so-
cieties of four participants, who interacted in alternating dyads using an artificial language to refer to novel
meanings. Importantly, the communication included two real-world aspects of language acquisition and use,
which introduce compressibility pressures: (a) multiple interaction partners and (b) an expanding meaning
space. Our results show that languages become significantly more structured over time, with participants con-
verging on shared, stable, and compositional lexicons. These findings indicate that new learners are not ne-
cessary for the formation of linguistic structure within a community, and have implications for related fields
such as developing sign languages and creoles.
1. Introduction
Amongst the most important questions in the field of language
evolution are how and why linguistic structure emerged, and under
which pressures it evolved (Bickerton, 2007). According to usage-based
theories, language is an adaptive and culturally transmitted system that
has evolved to fit speakers' cognitive biases and constraints (Deacon,
1997; Reali & Griffiths, 2009; Smith, 2011) and to maximize their
communicative success (Beckner et al., 2009; Mirolli & Parisi, 2008). A
critical phase in the process of language evolution is the transition from
an unstructured proto-language to a state of a full-blown language that
exhibits compositional structure (Jackendoff, 1999; Zlatev, 2008).
Compositionality, i.e., the systematic recombination of small units to
express different meanings, is considered one of the hallmarks of nat-
ural language, which differentiate it from animal communication sys-
tems (Hockett, 1960). Indeed, one of the things that makes natural
languages so unique is their infinite expressive power, which is the
direct result of compositionality: we can talk about an unlimited set of
meanings thanks to our ability to recombine a limited set of sub-ele-
ments in systematic ways.
In the past two decades, two different strands of experimental work
have attempted to investigate the factors involved in the emergence of
linguistic systems from two distinct perspectives. First, Experimental
Semiotics studies focused on the communicative and social nature of
language evolution, and examined how interactions between pairs or
groups influence convergence, iconicity and complexity of visual sig-
nals (e.g.,Galantucci & Garrod, 2011; Garrod, Fay, Lee, Oberlander, &
MacLeod, 2007). In Experimental Semiotics studies, the main pressure
is a communicative pressure for expressivity: signals should be ex-
pressive, informative and communicatively efficient in order to allow
for reliable discrimination between potential referents, and should be
shared across participants to allow for mutual understanding. Second,
Iterated Learning studies focused on how individuals’ cognitive biases
and constraints shape previously established signs over the repeated
transmission to new generations of learners, and examined how signal
systems change in terms of learnability and structure (e.g.,Beckner,
Pierrehumbert, & Hay, 2017; Kirby, Cornish, & Smith, 2008). In Iter-
ated Learning studies, the main pressure is a learning pressure for
compressibility: limitations on memory create a pressure for signals to
become simpler, more compressed and more predictable, so that lan-
guages could be easily learned from a finite set of exemplars, and
generalizable to a new set of exemplars (Kirby, Griffiths, & Smith, 2014;
Kirby et al., 2008). Both these literatures have generated numerous
novel findings with important implications for the evolution of lan-
guage. For example, Experimental Semiotics paradigms have been used
to examine the emergence of arbitrary signals from iconic signs (e.g.,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.09.010
Received 25 September 2017; Received in revised form 13 September 2018; Accepted 13 September 2018
⁎ Corresponding author at: Max Plank Institute for Psycholinguistics, P.O. Box 310, 6500 AH Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
E-mail address:limor.raviv@mpi.nl(L. Raviv).
Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
0010-0277/ © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T

PAGE 2
Garrod et al., 2007). Iterated Learning has typically been used to ex-
amine the creation of compositional regularities (e.g.,Kirby et al.,
2008), but has also been used to examine the evolution of case markers
(e.g.,Smith & Wonnacott, 2010) and color terms (e.g.,Xu, Dowman, &
Griffiths, 2013).
In a recent and highly influential study,Kirby, Tamariz, Cornish,
and Smith (2015)combined the paradigms of Experimental Semiotics
and Iterated Learning and contrasted two experimental conditions:
communication with transmission vs. communication without trans-
mission. In the communication and transmission condition (the “chain”
condition), pairs of participants communicated about a structured
meaning space using an artificial language, and then their languages
were transmitted to new pairs of participants over several generations.
In the communication without transmission condition (the “closed
group” condition), pairs interacted amongst themselves for several
rounds, with no new learners being introduced over time. The results
showed that when languages were transmitted over multiple genera-
tions of pairs, they developed compositional, morphology-like struc-
tures in which different affixes were systematically combined to express
similarities in meanings. In contrast, when the same pairs commu-
nicated for repeated rounds without generational turnover, they cre-
ated holistic, unstructured languages in which each item was assigned a
unique label, and feature overlap between items was not reflected in the
labels.
Kirby et al. (2015)argued that the reason compositionality did not
emerge in the closed-group condition is because pairs were able to get
highly familiar with the signs, so there was no reason for them to de-
velop compressed, systematic structures instead of holistic languages.
They interpret their results as showing that (1) compositionality arises
only as a tradeoff between expressivity and compressibility pressures;
and (2) that expressivity and compressibility pressures stem from two
independent sources - communication and transmission – which op-
erate at different timescales.Kirby et al. (2015)view these two pro-
cesses as bringing about conflicting constraints: while horizontal intra-
generational communication pushes languages to become maximally
expressive, vertical cross-generational transmission pushes languages to
become maximally compressed. By providing a systematic mapping
between meanings and signals, compositionality offers an equilibrium
between the need to minimize the associated memory and cognitive
costs while maximizing languages’ expressivity. This idea suggests that
the basic architecture of natural language can be explained by the in-
teraction of conflicting weak cognitive biases and processing limita-
tions, and by taking the pragmatic context in which languages evolve
into account (Christiansen & Chater, 2016; Culbertson & Kirby, 2016).
Importantly,Kirby et al. (2015)fully equate expressivity and com-
pressibility pressures with communication and transmission respec-
tively. They argue that horizontal communication gives rise to ex-
pressivity pressures due to people’s communicative goals: languages
should be expressive given the need to interact and successfully dis-
criminate between different meanings. Vertical transmission is argued
to give rise to compressibility pressures due to people’s memory lim-
itations and cognitive biases: languages should be simple and easy to
learn given that are being repeatedly learned over generations by new
people. They predict that compositionality emerges only when both
communication and transmission are at play, as a solution to these
competing pressures. On one hand, a compressibility pressure operating
in isolation (e.g., languages are only transmitted across generations of
learners, but not used for communication) leads to underspecified
languages with minimalistic lexicons, where multiple meanings are
represented with a single word (as found inKirby et al., 2008). While
such simple systems are highly compressed and easy to learn, they are
degenerated, ambiguous and lacked expressivity. On the other hand, an
expressivity pressure operating in isolation (e.g., languages are only
used for communication, but never transmitted to new learners) should
potentially result in languages with massive lexicons, where each
meaning is represented with a unique word. While such holistic systems
would be maximally expressive, they would also be incompressible and
therefore hard to learn and remember by new individuals. If languages
need to be both expressive and compressed (i.e., because they are being
used for communication as well as being transmitted to new learners),
developing regularities in the form of compositional structure will
maintain their informativity while reducing the memory load and in-
creasing languages’ learnability. This is because compositional lan-
guages allow for the expression of multiple different meanings using a
recombination of the same basic elements. As such, a compositional
language is highly compressed and simpler in comparison to a holistic
language (where the same set of meanings would require memorizing
more unique words), while also being highly expressive and in-
formative in comparison to a degenerated language (where the same set
of meanings would be indistinguishable). In sum,Kirby et al. (2015)
predict that both communication and transmission are necessary for the
emergence of compositionality, and conclude that communication
alone (i.e., without generation turnover) is not enough for composi-
tionality to emerge. This finding has since been replicated with dif-
ferent meaning spaces (Carr, Smith, Cornish, & Kirby, 2017; Winters,
Kirby, & Smith, 2015) and with artificial sign languages (Motamedi,
Schouwstra, Smith, & Kirby, 2016).
This conclusion has far-reaching implications for the literature on
the evolution of language, as well as for the broader field of cultural
evolution. First, it directly relates to work on creolization and emerging
sign language by suggesting that one of the “design features” of natural
language may need several generations to emerge. Supporting this idea,
studies on the developing Nicaraguan sign language have shown that
complex linguistic structure emerges over multiple cohorts of learners
(Senghas, Kita, & Ozyurek, 2004), and work on pidgins has suggested
that new child learners are required in order to develop recursion
(Bickerton, 1984). Second, it affects the reasoning and predictions
made about the structure of human lexicons over time: from under-
standing trends in metaphorical mappings (Xu, Malt, & Srinivasan,
2017) to measuring the entropy and informativity of words (Bentz,
Alikaniotis, Cysouw, & Ferrer-i-Cancho, 2017). Going beyond language
evolution and change, this conclusion has already influenced work on a
wide range of human behaviors. For example, compressibility pressures
during cross-generational transmission have been implied to play a role
in explaining cross-cultural differences in folk tale complexity (Acerbi,
Kendal, & Tehrani, 2017), musical universals (Trehub, 2015), and the
propagation and stabilization of behavioral conventions (Scott-Phillips,
2017).
In the current paper we suggest that communication in the real
world includes not only expressivity pressures, but also several sources
for compressibility pressures. In other words, while we agree withKirby
et al. (2015)that both expressivity and compressibility pressures are
necessary for the emergence of compositionality, we believe that both
pressures are already present during real-world communication.
Therefore, we predict that in contrast toKirby et al.’s (2015)conclu-
sion, compositionality can emerge during communication in a closed
group without generational transmission. This prediction is in line with
several non-linguistic communication studies, which found that com-
positional structure can emerge in signal systems during interaction
alone. First,Selten and Warglien (2007)found that when pairs of
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
152

PAGE 3
participants communicated using strings of consonants (e.g., RZ) to
refer to a structured meaning space of shapes and patterns, 12% of pairs
developed compositional codes where they systematically combined
unique consonants that were assigned according to shape and pattern.
Even though compositional structure was not prevalent in the codes
developed by participants, this study does provide evidence that com-
positionalitycanemerge during dyadic interaction without additional
learners. Second,Theisen, Oberlander, and Kirby (2010)found that
some compositionality existed in drawings in dyadic interaction, with
participants’ drawings showing some re-use of smaller elements to ex-
press similarities in meanings (e.g., using squiggly lines to refer to ac-
tivities/situations). However, the systematicity in these drawings was
determined subjectively and existed already in the first round of in-
teraction rather than developed with time over the course of commu-
nication. Third,Nölle, Staib, Fusaroli, and Tylén (2018)found that
when pairs needed to communicated about items that were not im-
mediately present in the moment of communication (simulating dis-
placement), their silent gestures became more systematic so that some
part-gestures were used at least twice to describe items that shared a
meaning category. Finally,Verhoef, Walker, and Marghetis (2016)re-
port that visual signal systems (i.e., spatial lines generated by a vertical
touch bar) for describing temporal concepts became significantly more
compositional over the course of dyadic communication, with sys-
tematic re-use of visual signals to represent different meanings. An
additional motivation for the idea that communication plays a role in
the emergence of structure comes from a study that examined the ne-
gotiation of drawings in dyads and micro-societies over repeated in-
teractions (Fay, Garrod, Roberts, & Swoboda, 2010). While this study
did not examine compositionality, it reported the refinement and the
simplification of visual signs as a product of communication, so that
drawings became more compressed and less iconic over time. Together,
these findings suggest that communication can give rise to structure
over time, even without generation turnover.
In the current study we assess whether compositional structure can
reliably emerge in an artificial language during communication in a
closed group, when the interaction includes two real-world properties
of languages acquisition and use that can give rise to communicative
compressibility pressures: namely, talking to multiple people, and in-
teracting over an expanding lexicon. We argue that these two properties
introduce compressibility pressures that can drive the formation of
compositionality in languages during interaction in a closed group,
even without transmission to new learners. In general, compressibility
pressures emerge due to participants’ limited memory capacity: it is
simply too hard to memorize many unique and unrelated labels in a
relatively short time. Here we propose that such memory limitations
can stem from different sources: compressibility pressures in transmis-
sion stem from biases and constraints on learning a given input lan-
guage, while compressibility pressure in communication stem from the
need to converge on a shared, expressive, and productive language with
others. While communication in previous studies (e.g.,Kirby et al.,
2015; Selten & Warglien, 2007; Theisen et al., 2010) included com-
municating with only one partner over a fixed set of meanings, com-
munication in the real-world involves talking to many different people,
and referring to an open set of topics.Kirby et al. (2015)touch upon
both of these properties in their discussion, but they do so only in re-
lation to transmission: they discuss the consequences of learning lan-
guages with larger lexicons (p. 98), and predict that chains with bigger
populations will develop more structure over time (p. 99). Here, we
suggest that these two properties of language acquisition and language
use can introduce compressibility pressures during communication,
which are sufficient for the emergence of compositionality.
The first possible source of compressibility pressures in real-world
communication is interaction with many different people. Models of
language acquisition in early infancy stress the importance of receiving
input from multiple speakers, who introduce variability in pronuncia-
tion, speaking rates, styles, and vocabulary (Kuhl, 2004). This input
variability can highlight systematic differences and similarities in lin-
guistic input, and help to separate relevant patterns and consistencies
from irrelevant differences in the input. This idea is supported by lan-
guage learning studies that demonstrate how an increase in input
variability (e.g., learning from multiple speakers) can boost categor-
ization, generalization and pattern detection in both infants and adults
(Gómez, 2002; Lev-Ari & Shao, 2017; Lively, Logan, & Pisoni, 1993;
Maye, Werker, & Gerken, 2002; Perry, Samuelson, Malloy, & Schiffer,
2010; Rost & McMurray, 2009, 2010). In addition, communication
seems to lead to the elimination of unpredictable variation (Fehér,
Wonnacott, & Smith, 2016). Indeed, talking to multiple people is con-
sidered a key factor in models of language contact and language
change, pushing languages to develop more structure. Specifically, it
has been argued that interaction with more people results in more
transparent and more simplified grammars (Nettle, 2012; Wray &
Grace, 2007). According to these models, interacting with more people
introduces more input variability and more noise, which need to be
overcome before the community can reach convention. Thus, inter-
acting with more people can favor systemization in languages by in-
troducing more input variability and therefore a stronger need for
generalizations.
InKirby et al. (2015), communication included interaction with
only one other person, so input variability was low and it was relatively
easy to achieve convergence: Pairs were able to agree on a holistic,
unstructured language that contained a unique label for each item.
However, developing such a holistic lexicon is far more complicated
when the unique labels of more than one partner need to be re-
membered, or when the lexicon should be shared across multiple
people. When there are more people to interact with, input variability
increases as each person introduces their own unique variations to each
of the labels, which is taxing for memory. In addition, if labels are
idiosyncratic and the language is unstructured, each label needs to be
negotiated separately and independently with all partners. Therefore,
the need to converge with multiple people introduces a memory lim-
itation (i.e., compressibility pressure), pushing languages to become
less holistic and develop more transparent and more predictable
structures (e.g., by introducing compositionality), so that they can be
easily shared across participants without negotiating each label sepa-
rately. Supporting this claim, two computational models have shown
that compositional languages can emerge over the course of multiple
dyadic interactions in populations of five interacting agents (De Beule &
Bergen, 2006; Gong, Ke, Minett, & Wang, 2004). These models show
that compositional languages are favored during repeated commu-
nication even within a single generation, and demonstrate how an in-
crease in compositionality can facilitate communicative success and
convergence between agents in the population.
A second possible source of compressibility pressures in real-world
communication is interaction over an expanding lexicon, a notable
property of language use and acquisition. Children need to commu-
nicate and refer to more and more things over time. Furthermore,
growth in vocabulary size is associated with increased generalization in
language: knowing more words can boost children’s learning of lexical
categories, morphological paradigms and syntactic structures (Blom,
Paradis, & Duncan, 2012; Goldberg, 1999; Perry, Axelsson, & Horst,
2016; Samuelson & Smith, 1999). Familiarity with more exemplars can
help children detect significant patterns in the input and improve their
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
153

PAGE 4
ability to generalize the pattern to new, unfamiliar exemplars. Im-
portantly, children’s ultimate goal is to learn how to produce and
comprehend an infinite set of meanings from a finite set of exemplars.
This point is also a main theme in computational work by Kirby and
colleagues, which stressed the importance of a “learning bottleneck”
during transmission for the formation of compositionality (e.g.,Kirby
et al., 2008; Kirby & Hurford, 2002; Smith, Brighton, & Kirby, 2003):
agents are usually not exposed to the entire repertoire of the language,
and learn only a subset of the system. Despite their partial exposure,
learners are later required to produce labels to new unfamiliar events.
For example,Kirby et al. (2008)trained participants on only half of the
items in the language, but tested them on all items. This learning bot-
tleneck created a learnability pressure and promoted generalization. In
Kirby et al. (2008)’sseminal set of experiments, this property of
transmission and learning was introduced as the main pressure pushing
languages to develop systematic structures over generations of learners
(i.e., compressibility pressures).
Such a bottleneck was absent inKirby et al. (2015). In that study,
pairs communicated about a fixed (and relatively small) number of
items for several rounds, and got highly familiar with the entire
meaning space of the language over time. Given sufficient time, mem-
orizing a unique label for every item was feasible, and there was no
pressure to develop a systematic and predictable way to label items.
However, such a strategy will become problematic if the meaning space
is much bigger, or if it expands over time: if participants develop hol-
istic languages that have no inner structure, not only will they need to
negotiate the labels for each new item separately and independently
without the ability to rely on previously established labels, but they will
also be faced with memory limitations once the language contains a
large enough number of meanings. Thus, the need to discriminate be-
tween more and more items over time introduces a pressure for gen-
eralization and systemization similar to a “learning bottleneck”. As
participants are exposed to more and more items (and consequentially,
more input variability), they should be able to detect repeating patterns
in their input, which can promote the development of more productive
and more predictable labeling methods. This idea is also supported by
the findings ofNölle et al. (2018), who report that participants’ gestures
became more systematic when new meanings were introduced. The
productive power of natural language, which stems from its composi-
tional structure, is therefore motivated by the fact that some elements
in the input (real world or an artificial meaning space) are repeated in
various contexts. Given this feature, compositionality will allow parti-
cipants to efficiently express novel meanings and be immediately un-
derstood, due to the recombination of elements that have already been
negotiated. In other words, interacting over an expanding meaning
space (which is also structured to some extent) biases against holistic
and unstructured systems.
Some preliminary findings suggest that compositionality can indeed
arise in these conditions, which are more ecologically valid and relate
more to the way language is used in the real world. In particular, we
conducted a pilot study in which three closed micro-societies of four
participants communicated about novel items (Raviv, Meyer, & Lev-Ari,
2017). Participants interacted in alternating dyads using an artificial
language, and needed to describe a set of items to each other in order to
earn points in a communication game. Each item was one of four novel
shapes, and appeared in a particular size ranging from 2 cm
2 to 9 cm2 .
Additionally, each item had a unique fill pattern. At first, participants
were exposed to only eight items and needed to name them using novel
labels. Over the course of six rounds, we added more and more items to
the game and examined changes in the languages created by the par-
ticipants. As our goal was to create a paradigm where structure emerges
in a closed group, we tried to maximize communicative compressibility
pressures by including both pressures (i.e., communicating with mul-
tiple partners and an expanding meaning space), rather than teasing
them apart. The results of this pilot study showed that linguistic
structure (measured in the same way as inKirby et al. (2015), see de-
tailed description below) significantly increased over communication
rounds, and some compositionality emerged even in the absence of
generational transmission.
While these results were encouraging, they were based on three
groups only. Additionally, while the analysis over all groups showed a
significant increase in compositionality, a closer look suggested that
this might have been the case for only two out of the three groups.
Finally, it seemed that languages mostly developed compositional
coding for the dimension of shape, but less or not at all for the di-
mension of size. This result is in line with the “shape bias” reported
during novel word learning: children and adults are much more likely
to categorize novel items based on their shape, and much less likely to
do so based on size (Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988). Therefore, to re-
plicate and confirm our findings, in Study 1 we ran twice as many
groups of four participants each, and substituted the size dimension
with a more salient dimension (i.e., motion) that turned the items into
dynamic, event-like scenes. The results of this study are reported in full
below, and confirm that compositional structure can emerge during
communication without generational turnover.
In Study 2, we evaluated the relative contribution of the two com-
pressibility pressures using a meta-analysis that included data from the
six groups in Study 1 as well as 18 additional groups of either four or
eight participants, which were tested using the same paradigm. The
results of this meta-analysis replicated the main finding of Study 1 and
show that interaction with multiple partners was the main driver for the
emergence of compositionality during communication.
2. Study 1
The goal of this study was to test whether compositional structure
can emerge without generational transmission. In particular, we ex-
amined whether introducing two compressibility pressures, i.e., inter-
action with multiple partners and an expanding meaning space, would
suffice for triggering the emergence of compositionality. We used a
group communication game in which different micro-societies of four
members interacted in alternating pairs, so that each participant in-
teracted with the other three members of the group at least twice.
Importantly, participants communicated using an artificial language
that referred to an expanding meaning space of novel scenes: the
number of scenes in the game increased over time, such that by the end
of the experiment participants needed to communicate about almost
triple the number of scenes as compared to the beginning. Each scene in
this experiment was composed of a shape moving in a given direction
across the screen. We tested whether compositionality emerged over
time, that is, whether similar meanings were referred to using similar
labels. In addition, we examined convergence, stability, and commu-
nicative success in the languages to characterize the emerging com-
munication systems and to better understand how these properties
change over time.
2.1. Method
2.1.1. Participants
24 adults (mean age: 23.2; 18 women) took part in the experiment
reported here, comprising six closed groups with four members each.
Though our pilot results suggested that three groups are sufficient to
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
154

PAGE 5
test the emergence of compositionality, we doubled the sample size to
ensure that the results are robust. All participants were native Dutch
speakers and were recruited using the participant database of the Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics. Participants were paid between
20 and 26 Euros for their participation, depending on the amount of
time they spent in the lab (ranging between 2:00 and 2:45 h). In ad-
dition, four participants from the winning group received an additional
20 euros for collecting the highest number of points. Ethical approval
was granted by the Faculty of Social Sciences of the Radboud University
Nijmegen. The study was part of a bigger project whose goal is to test
the effect of group size on compositionality, and thus included six ad-
ditional groups of eight participants each. We report the results of the
bigger project elsewhere (Raviv, Meyer & Lev-Ari, under review). Im-
portantly, the compositionality results reported here hold if we analyze
all 12 groups, or only the six other omitted groups (see also Study 2).
2.1.2. Stimuli
We created visual scenes that varied along two semantic dimen-
sions: shape and angle of motion, creating a semi-structured, con-
tinuous meaning space. We created three different versions of the sti-
muli, which differed in the distribution of shapes and angles (for a full
list of shapes and their associated angles seeAppendix A). Each version
contained exactly 23 scenes, and was presented to two different groups.
Groups that played the same version were given the scenes in a reverse
order during the communication phase.
All scenes appeared on the screen surrounded by a white 8 cm2
frame, and the movement was restricted within those borders. Each
scene included exactly one of four distinct shapes (sized 2.55 cm2 ),
which moved repeatedly from the center of the frame in a straight line
in a given angle. The four shapes were created to be novel and am-
biguous, in order to prevent easy labeling with existing words. In ad-
dition, each moving shape was associated with a unique fill pattern,
giving each scene an idiosyncratic, unstructured feature.
Our meaning space was therefore semi-structured: some semantic
features (e.g., shape, direction of movement) repeated across different
scenes, while some features (e.g., fill pattern) did not. This property of
the meaning space was meant to simulate the real world, where some
elements repeat in different combinations while others are unique. As
such, our meaning space promoted categorization and structure with
respect to shape and motion, while it also allowed participants to adopt
a holistic strategy in which scenes are individualized according to fill
pattern. In addition, motion was a continuous rather than a categorical
feature, so that participants were not encouraged to categorize it in any
particular way: they could parse it in various ways, and could differ in
the way they categorized what it “new” and what is a “recombination”.
For each version of the stimuli, the 23 scenes were created in the
following way: first, we selected 23 static items from an initial, fixed set
of 28 static items, which contained seven tokens of each shape. Each
token was associated with a unique blue-hued fill pattern. The 23 static
items were randomly drawn from this fixed set with the constraint that
each type of shape should appear between four to seven times. Then,
each of the 23 static items was associated with an angle in order to
create a scene. Angles were randomly selected from a set of 16 angles
within the 360-degree-range (0°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 90°, 120°, 135°, 150°,
180°, 210°, 225°, 240°, 270°, 300°, 315°, 330°)
1, following the constraint
that each type of shape had to be associated with at least one angle from
each of the four quadrants. The rest of the items’ angles were randomly
drawn from this set of angles.
2.1.3. Procedure
The experiment was designed as a group communication game, with
each group comprised of four different members. Participants were told
they were about to create a new “Fantasy Language” in the lab, and use
it in order to communicate with each other about different novel
scenes. No talking or gesturing was allowed during the experiment, and
participants were instructed to use only the “Fantasy Language” and
their assigned laptops in order to communicate. The experimenters
actively monitored participants’ productions throughout the experi-
ment to ensure they do not include known words. If a participant typed
a label that contained a known word, they were required to change it.
Notably, this method was highly successful, with only a few exceptions.
Those exceptions were implicit in nature, and were not detected during
the experiment by either the participants or the experimenters.
Importantly, in most of these exceptions, the strings referred to the
idiosyncratic fill pattern of the shapes, thus hindering rather than
promoting compositionality. Participants’ letter inventory was re-
stricted, and included five vowel characters (a,e,i,o,u) and ten
(B) 
(C) 
765
431 2
8
TARGET CHOSEN
(A) 
PLEASE TYPE A DESCRIPTION FOR THIS SCENE 
Fig. 1.Example of the computer interfaces in a single game in the commu-
nication phase. Arrows illustrate the shapes’ direction of movement on the
screen. The producer saw the target scene on their screen (A) and typed a de-
scription for it using their keyboard. Once the guesser saw the description
(presented on the producer’s screen), they selected a scene from a set of eight
possible scenes that was presented on their screen (B). Finally, participants
were given feedback, including the target and the chosen scene (C).
1 Due to a technical error, during the last test round two groups were pre-
sented with angles selected from a set of 36 angles separated by 10 degrees (i.e.,
0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50…). Given that participants have developed productive and
systematic languages by that point, they did not notice this error and were
easily able to name these scenes.
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
155

PAGE 6
consonants (w,t,p,s,f,g,h,k,n,m) which participants could combine
freely. We restricted the number of consonants as a means to limit
participants’ ability to construct known Dutch words. The consonants
were chosen based on Dutch phonology, while not including letters like
“r” and “l” in order to avoid the use of acronyms or shortcuts for in-
dicating left and right. In addition to these letters (all in lower case),
participants could also use a hyphen (but not the space bar).
The experiment had eight rounds in total and took about two hours
to complete. It included three unique phases: a group naming phase
(round 0), a communication phase (rounds 1–7) and a test phase (round
8). One or two experimenters were present during the entire duration of
the experiment.
For the initial naming phase (round 0), eight scenes were randomly
drawn from the set of 23 scenes chosen for this group (see Stimuli) with
the constraint that each shape and each quadrant were represented at
least once. During this phase, participants sat together in a room next to
a single computer, and were exposed to the eight selected scenes that
appeared on the computer screen one by one in a random order. For
each scene, one of the participants was asked to use their creativity and
type a description for it using one or more nonsense words. Participants
took turns in describing the scenes (i.e., typing them using the com-
puter keyboard), so the first scene was described by participant A, the
second scene was described by participant B, and so on. Importantly, no
use of Dutch or any other language was allowed, and participants were
instructed to come up with novel, “gibberish” labels. Once a participant
had typed a description for a given scene, it was presented on a screen
along with the scene to the rest of their group members for about five to
seven seconds. This procedure was repeated until all eight scenes have
been presented and named, with each participant describing exactly
two scenes. After all scene-label combinations had been created and
presented once, we presented the scene-description pairings to parti-
cipants twice more in a random order in order to establish common
ground.
Following the group naming phase, participants were told that they
had now created the initial vocabulary of the “Fantasy Language” and
so they can start playing the actual game (the communication phase).
The participants were told that the goal of the game was to be com-
municative and earn as many points as possible as a group, with a point
awarded for every successful interaction. The experimenters stressed
that this was not a memory game but a communication game, and that
participants could choose to use the labels produced during the group
naming phase, but they did not have to. If a participant had a better
label for a given scene that they thought would be understood by their
partner, they could choose to use that label instead.
During the communication phase (rounds 1–7), group members
interacted in alternating dyads, exchanging communication partners at
every round such that each pair in the group interacted at least twice
overall. At the beginning of each communication round, the group was
split up into two pairs, who sat in different corners of the same room
and were separated by a large room divider. Each participant was then
assigned a laptop. In each communication round, paired participants
played a total of 23 guessing games with each other, with participants
alternating between the roles of producer and guesser. In a given game,
the producer saw the target scene on their screen (seeFig. 1a), and
typed a description for it using their keyboard. Once the producer fin-
ished typing, they pressed Enter and the description appeared in a large
font on their screen, without the target scene. They then rotated their
screen using a rotating platform and presented only the description to
their partner. The guesser was presented with a grid of eight different
scenes on their screen (the target and seven distractors; seeFig. 1b),
with each scene associated with a number between 1 and 8. The guesser
then pressed the number associated with the scene they thought their
partner referred to using their laptop’s keyboard. Note that the numbers
1–8 were only available to the guesser during this phase, but were
blocked from use in participants’ typed descriptions. The guesser then
received feedback on their screen (seeFig. 1c), which they rotated and
shared with the producer, allowing participants to learn and align. If
the interaction was successful, the pair was awarded with 1 point. At
the end of each round, pairs saw the number of points that they accu-
mulated in this round on their screens. Importantly, the total number of
points earned by all pairs was added up to a group score, and partici-
pants’ goal was to maximize their score as a group. Groups were ex-
plicitly motivated to earn points: they were told that they were com-
peting against other groups, and that the group with the highest score
will win an additional prize of 20 euros.
Crucially, the number of different target scenes increased from
round to round, creating an expanding meaning space. Round 1 in-
cluded only the eight scenes described in the group naming phase,
which repeated for a total of 23 games. In the next round, three new
scenes were added to the eight familiar ones, resulting in 11 different
target scenes. These appeared in random order for a total of 23 games,
with the constraint that each familiar scene was presented at least once
and that new scenes were presented at least twice. In round 3 we again
added three more new scenes to the existing 11, and randomized these
14 scenes to fill 23 games according to the same principle. This con-
tinued for all following rounds until there were exactly 23 different
scenes in round 6, each appearing once without repetition. No more
scenes were introduced in round 7, allowing participants to commu-
nicate about the entire meaning space more than once.
After the last communication round, each participant completed a
test phase in which they were presented individually with all scenes in a
random order, and were asked to type their descriptions using the
“Fantasy Language”. After the test, participants also filled out a ques-
tionnaire about their performance in the experiment, including ques-
tions such as “Did you notice any structure in the scenes used in Fantasy
Language?”, and “Did you try to adopt your partner’s language?”.
Finally, all participants were debriefed by the experimenter.
2.2. Results
We examined the artificial languages developed in this experiment
according to four measures: (1) communicative success, (2) degree of
convergence, (3) language stability, and (4) compositional structure.
While our main goal was to examine the emergence of compositionality
(captured by the last-mentioned measure), looking at each of the four
measures separately enabled us to better characterize the emerging
communication systems and to understand how different linguistic
properties changed over time.
For all analyses reported in the paper, we used mixed effects re-
gression models. Note that in these types of communication experi-
ments, groups are treated as individual units, similar to single partici-
pants in traditional psychology experiments. All models were generated
using the lme4 and pbkrtest packages in R (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, &
Walker, 2015; Halekoh & Højsgaard, 2014; R Core Team, 2016). The
pbkrtest package provides p-value using the Kenward-Roger Approx-
imation, which gives more conservative p-values for models based a
relatively small number of observations. All models converged with the
maximal random effects structure. Unless noted otherwise, this struc-
ture included random intercepts for each of the six groups and each of
the 23 scenes, and random slopes for all fixed effects with respect to
different groups and different scenes. We report the fixed effects
structure of each model separately. The raw data can be found at
https://osf.io/wht86/.
2.2.1. Communicative success
Communicative success was measured as response accuracy during
the communication phase. We used a logit mixed-effects regression
model to predict accuracy (coded as 1 or 0) in a given turn. The fixed
effects were Round Number and Item Current Age (both centered). All
items started with an age of 1 (the first exposure), except for the eight
scenes that were introduced in the naming phase, which started with an
age of 2 (as we considered round 0 to be the first exposure). Therefore,
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
156

PAGE 7
Item Current Age codes the number of rounds a participant has been
exposed to a specific scene until that point in the game, and measures
the effect of familiarity with a given scene on performance. In contrast,
Round Number measures the effect of overall language proficiency and
degree of shared history on performance. The model showed that par-
ticipants became significantly more successful as rounds progressed
(β = 0.2, SE = 0.06, z = 3.1, p < 0.01; seeTable 1andFig. 2). No
other effect was significant.
2.2.2. Convergence
Convergence was measured by calculating the differences between
the labels produced by different participants for the same scene in a
given round: for each scene in roundn, convergence was calculated by
averaging over the normalized Levenstein distances between all labels
produced by different participants for that scene. The normalized
Levenstein distance between two strings is the minimal number of in-
sertions, substitutions, and deletions of a single character that is re-
quired in order to turn one string into the other, divided by the number
of characters in the longer string of the two. This distance was then
subtracted from 1 to represent string similarity, reflecting the degree of
shared lexicon in the group by examining how aligned participants
were. Convergence was expected to increase over time so that different
participants will use increasingly similar labels.
We used a mixed-effects linear regression model to predict con-
vergence. The fixed effects were Round Number and Item Current Age
(both centered). The model showed a numeric increase in string simi-
larities over rounds indicating an increase in convergence, but this was
only marginal in our relatively conservative threshold for significance
(β = 0.02, SE = 0.01, t = 2, p = 0.067; seeTable 2andFig. 3). No
other effect was significant. The model thus suggests that the partici-
pants started developing a shared lexicon over time, and were mar-
ginally more converged as rounds progressed. Yet notably, participants
were never fully aligned: even in the final round, the average similarity
between labels produced by different participants for the same scenes
was around 0.5 (seeFig. 3), indicating that participants used labels
which shared on average about half of their characters.
2.2.3. Stability
Languages’ stability was measured by calculating the differences
between the labels created by participants for the same scenes on
consecutive rounds: for each scene in roundn, stability was calculated
by averaging over the normalized Levenstein distances between all la-
bels produced for that scene in roundnand all labels produced for that
scene in roundn+ 1. This distance reflects the degree of change in
participants’ reproduction of the labels over time. Note that this para-
meter is referred to as “Learnability” inKirby et al. (2008, 2015), since
it reflected the degree of transmission errors between learned and
produced labels in each generation in an iterated learning paradigm.
Here, the string differences are not measured over consecutive gen-
erations of different learners, but rather over consecutive rounds of
communication, with the same people producing the strings (and
modifying them). This distance was then subtracted from 1 to represent
string similarity, reflecting how consistent participants were in re-
producing the labels over consecutive rounds. Since in our design
participants were not asked to memorize and recall the scenes but ra-
ther use the label they find most effective, this parameter indicates the
degree of language stability (and not transmission fidelity). Stability
was expected to increase over time as participants become more fa-
miliar with the language.
We used a mixed-effects linear regression model to predict stability.
The fixed effects were Round Number and Item Current Age (both
centered). The model showed a numeric increase in string similarities
over rounds, such that stability marginally increased with time
(β = 0.028, SE = 0.01, t = 2.19, p = 0.06; seeTable 3andFig. 4).
Interestingly, examining the rate of stabilization for scenes as they
entered the game revealed that newer scenes stabilized faster (Fig. 5).
For example, scenes that entered the game in the second round had a
stability score of 0.35, but scenes that entered the game in the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixth round had scores of 0.38, 0.41, 0.47, and 0.49,
respectively. That is, the later scenes entered the game, the less they
Fig. 2.Summary statistics of mean accuracy by Round Number. The colored
lines represent the six groups. The black line represents the model’s estimate for
the effect of Round Number, and its shading represents the model’s standard
error. Round Number ranged from 1 (the first communication round) to 7 (the
last communication round). (For interpretation of the references to color in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 1
Accuracy model.
Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value
(Intercept) −0.273937 0.2174 −1.26 0.207
Item Current Age −0.000381 0.0213 −0.018 0.985
Round Number 0.202047 0.0651 3.1 0.001**
** < 0.01.
Table 2
Convergence model.
Estimate Std. Error t-value p-value
(Intercept) 0.38961 0.03813 10.218 < 0.001 ***
Item Current Age 0.0012 0.00476 0.2526 0.806
Round Number 0.02655 0.01266 2.096 0.067 .
. < 0.1.
*** < 0.001.
Fig. 3.Summary statistics of mean convergence by Round Number. Higher
string similarities between participants indicate greater convergence. The dif-
ferent colored lines represent the six groups. The black line represents the
model’s estimate for the effect of Round Number, and its shading represents the
model’s standard error. Round Number ranged from 1 (first communication
round) to 8 (the final test round). (For interpretation of the references to color
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
157

PAGE 8
changed, presumably because over time, participants have developed
structured languages that provided a predictable and consistent way of
describing new meanings. Thus, new labels are already coined in a
manner that fits the structure of the language.
2.2.4. Compositional structure
Compositional structure was measured by calculating the correla-
tions between labels’ string distances and scenes’ semantic distances in
a given language. Semantic differences were calculated in the following
way: first, scenes that differed in shape were given a difference score of
1, and scenes which contained the same shape were given a difference
score of 0. Then, we calculated the absolute difference between scenes’
angles, and divided it by the maximal possible distance between angles
(180 degrees) to yield a continuous, normalized score between 0 and 1.
Given that motion was a continuous dimension and that differences
between angles are perceptually smaller than the categorical difference
between shapes, shape was considered a perceptually favorable feature.
Therefore, we treated the maximal difference in angles (180 degrees) in
the same way as a difference between shapes. Finally, the difference
scores for shape and angle were added. Semantic distances therefore
ranged between 0.18 (the same shape moving in angles that are 10
degrees apart) and 2 (different shapes moving in angles that are 180
degrees apart). Labels’ string distances were calculated using the nor-
malized Levenshtein distances between all possible pairs of labels
produced by participantpin roundn, excluding pair-wise comparisons
between labels produced for the same scene. The two sets of pair-wise
distances (i.e., string distances and meaning distances) were then cor-
related using the Pearson product-moment correlation. This measure
reflects the amount of structure in the mapping between words and
meanings in different participants’ languages over time, by examining
the degree to which similar meanings are being expressed using similar
strings.
In most iterated learning studies (e.g.,Kirby et al., 2008, 2015), an
increase in structure over time is demonstrated by an increase in the z-
scores provided by the Mantel test for the correlations between
meaning and string distances described above. However, this was
problematic to do in the current design, since z-scores become larger as
the number of observations increase. Since our meaning space was
expanding over rounds, z-scores would have become inflated over
rounds. Therefore, we chose to examine compositional structure by
looking directly at the raw correlations. Running the analyses with z-
scores rather than the raw correlation does not change the significance
or direction of any of the reported effects.
It is also important to note that the structure measure used here and
inKirby et al. (2015)cannot differentiate between different types of
linguistic structures (e.g., compositionality vs. structured ambiguities,
like in the case of systematic use of homonyms), and only indicates how
much structure is present in the language. In previous iterated learning
studies, evidence for compositionality (e.g., re-use of sub-strings) was
based solely on individual examples of signal systems with such struc-
tures, as analyzed manually by the authors. Here, we also tried to justify
our claim about the emergence of compositionality by using a seg-
mentation algorithm developed by Stadler (under preparation), which
provides statistical support for the systematic re-use for sub-strings in
addition to subjective observations.
We used a mixed-effects linear regression model to predict the
correlation between meanings and strings in participants’ languages in
a given round. FollowingBeckner et al. (2017), we included both the
linear and the quadratic term for centered Round Number. The model
had random intercepts for producers nested within groups (but not for
scenes, as structure score was calculated over all scenes in a given
round), as well as by-producer random slops for the effect of round. The
model showed that structure increased significantly over rounds
(β = 1.19, SE = 0.1, t = 4.4, p < 0.01; seeTable 4). The quadratic
term for Round Number was not significant, indicating that structure
increased in a linear manner. The model thus confirmed that the lan-
guages in this experiment became significantly more compositional
over time despite the lack of generational transmission. AsFig. 6shows,
there was a high degree of compositional structure in this experiment,
with some groups reaching correlations as high as 0.6.
Fig. 7illustrates one type of compositional structure that emerged in
this experiment, using an example from the sixth group. For visuali-
zation purposes, we highlighted each meaningful sub-string in a
Fig. 4.Summary statistics of mean stability by Round Number. Higher string
similarity between consecutive rounds indicate greater stability. The different
colored lines represent the six groups. The black line represents the model’s
estimate for the effect of Round Number, and its shading represents the model’s
standard error. Round Number ranged from 1 (a comparison of the first com-
munication round to the naming round) to 8 (a comparison of the final test
phase to the last communication round). (For interpretation of the references to
color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)
Fig. 5.Summary statistics of mean stability by Round Number and Items’
Entrance Round for all labels that were introduced after the initial round.
Higher string similarities between consecutive rounds indicate greater stability.
Items’ Entrance Round reflects the point in time at which the item was in-
troduced into the game, and ranged from 2 (the first items that entered the
game in Round 2) to 6 (the last items that entered the game in Round 6). The
blue hued lines represent the starting round of new labels, with darker hues for
items that entered the game in a later stage. Round Number ranged from 3
(compared to Round 2) to 8 (the final test phase compared to the last com-
munication round).
Table 3
Stability model.
Estimate Std. Error t-value p-value
(Intercept) 0.42706 0.03119 13.689 < 0.001 ***
Item Current Age 0.00215 0.00615 0.3497 0.735
Round Number 0.02811 0.01279 2.1967 0.0609 .
. < 0.1.
*** < 0.001.
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
158

PAGE 9
different color, and added a “dictionary” to the language. This seg-
mentation was statistically motivated by the mutual predictability
segmentation algorithm (Stadler, under preparation), which looks at a
given semantic dimension (e.g., shape) in the language of a given
participant in the final test phase, and searches for non-overlapping
sub-strings that co-occur with each of the different meanings. Then, it
selects the sub-string that has the highest mutual predictability for each
meaning, while merging different meanings if they are predicted by
exactly the same string. This provides a new way to statistically confirm
the existence of compositionality in artificial language experiments.
Importantly, Stadler’s segmentation algorithm identified all the sub-
strings indicated inFig. 72 .
As can been seen, the language in this example distinguishes be-
tween the four shapes in a systematic way, with each shape represented
by a unique prefix. For example, the segmentation algorithm confirmed
that the prefix “wush” was significantly associated with all labels for
scenes with Shape 4, and with none of the other shapes (mutual pre-
dictability = 1, p < 0.01). Interestingly, some prefixes for shape (e.g.,
“nenu” and “hakima”) originated from labels given during the naming
phase to a specific scene with that shape. Over time, these strings
spread to the rest of the group and were generalized to refer to all
scenes containing that shape. Similar trajectories were observed in all
groups. This process resembles the processes of Grammaticalization and
semantic extension in natural languages, where specific lexical items
can become functional markers over time, representing an entire class
of items or events.
As can be seen inFig. 7, direction of motion was also systematically
coded, with participants categorizing this continuous dimension into
two orthogonal dimensions, horizontal and vertical: participants used
one affix to encode right (“mwahp”) vs. left (“hinn”), and another affix
to encode up (“hi”) vs. down (“na”). Participants combined these affixes
in compositional ways to represent motion. For example, scenes that
included a shape moving down-right (in 300, 315, or 330 degrees) were
all given the suffix “na-mwahp” (mutual predictability = 1, p < 0.01).
Importantly, not all groups categorized angles in this way, and other
types of categorization of the meanings space emerged, associated with
different compositional structures. For example, Group 1 categorized
scenes into seven prototypical directions which were each associated
with a unique single-character suffix, and Group 4 used different orders
and doubling of affixes to differentiate between directions.
Interestingly, there were also cases in which motion affixes originated
from a label given to a specific scene, which had a similar direction of
movement.
2.2.5. Result summary
The results of Study 1 show that groups became more accurate over
the course of interactions, and developed languages that became in-
creasingly stable, shared and structured over time. Importantly, as
predicted, compositional structure emerged in closed groups even
without generation turnover.
In the Introduction, we highlighted two mechanisms that may drive
compressibility pressures in real language use and could lead to the
emergence of compositionality during communication: (a) the need to
interact with multiple people, and (b) the need to refer to and dis-
criminate between more and more meanings over time. Since we
wanted to maximize the likelihood of compositional structure emer-
ging, we included both pressures in our communication paradigm.
Study 2 tries to tease apart these two pressures, and tests their in-
dividual role using a meta-analysis that included data from the six
groups reported above, as well as data from 18 additional groups that
were tested using an extended version of the same paradigm.3
3. Study 2: meta-analysis
In order to examine the unique contribution of our two commu-
nicative pressures, namely, interacting with multiple people and an
expanding meaning space, we conducted a meta-analysis over data
from 24 groups: the six groups reported in Study 1 above, and 18 ad-
ditional groups that were tested using the same paradigm. All 18 ad-
ditional groups played an extended version of the communication
game, including eight additional rounds (seven more communication
rounds + an additional test round). Of these 18 additional groups, six
were small groups of four participants, and 12 were larger groups of
eight participants. Below we report the details for these 18 additional
groups.
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants
The meta-analysis includes data from a total of 144 adults: the 24
participants who took part in Study 1 (mean age: 23.2; 18 women),
comprising of six small groups of four participants; and 120 additional
participants who took part in the extended version (mean age: 24.9; 88
women), comprising a total of six small groups of four participants, and
Table 4
Structure model.
Estimate Std. Error t-value p-value
(Intercept) 0.44257 0.0375 11.78 < 0.001 ***
Round Number (linear) 1.19169 0.2166 5.501 0.002 **
Round Number (quadratic) −0.20625 0.1984 −1.039 0.341
** < 0.01.
*** < 0.001.
Fig.6.Summary statistics of the label-meaning correlations by Round Number.
The different colored lines represent the six groups. The black line represents
the model’s estimate for the effect of Round Number, and its shading represent
the model’s standard error. Round number ranged from 0 (the group naming
phase) to 8 (the final test phase). (For interpretation of the references to color in
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
2 Since the labels used to refer to Shape 2 had more variation in its final letter
(i.e., “nena” and “nenu”), the algorithm was able to recognize only part of the
string as predictive (i.e,. “nen”). In addition, although the algorithm recognized
all the relevant sub-strings for directions with a mutual predictability score of 1,
this was not statistically significant for some directions (e.g., down; 270 de-
grees) due to the small number of scenes with this property
3These 18 additional groups were run using the same paradigm to test other
hypotheses (see Discussion) and will be reported elsewhere (Raviv, Meyer &
Lev-Ari, under review). Importantly, this specific analysis is not reported any-
where else. We are happy to share the data from these additional groups upon
request.
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
159

PAGE 10
12 larger groups of eight participants. Participants in Study 1 were paid
between 20 and 26 Euros for their participation, depending on the
amount of time they spent in the lab (ranging between 2:00 and 2:45 h).
Participants in the extended version were paid between 40 and 46
Euros for their participation, depending on the amount of time they
spent in the lab (ranging between 4:30 and 5:15 h, including a lunch
break). All participants were native Dutch speakers and were recruited
using the participant database of the Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics. Ethical approval was granted by the Faculty of Social
Sciences of the Radboud University Nijmegen.
3.1.2. Stimuli
Identical to the stimuli used in Study 1.
3.1.3. Procedure
The additional participants played an extended version of the
communication game reported in Study 1, in which the communication
phase and the test phase were repeated for a second time. Importantly,
this extended version had the same procedure, same settings and same
instructions as in Study 1, and the first eight rounds were identical.
Note that in the big groups, due to their larger size, implementing the
same procedure led to each participant naming only one item in the
naming phase, and for each pair interacting only half as many times as
each pair in the small groups. The additional eight rounds also followed
the same procedure as in the first eight rounds of Study 1, except for
one difference: no new items were introduced after the first eight
rounds. That is, the meaning space did not expand further in the ad-
ditional rounds, and included all 23 scenes from Study 1 and only them.
After completing the first eight rounds, participants in the extended
version had a lunch break (in which they were not allowed to talk about
the experiment) and then reconvened to complete seven additional
communication rounds (rounds 9–15) and an additional test round
(round 16) in the same settings. Therefore, the extended version in-
cluded 16 rounds in total, in three unique phases: a group naming phase
(round 0), a communication phase (rounds 1–7, rounds 9–15) and a test
phase (round 8, round 16).
Fig.7.An example of a compositional language, produced in the final test phase by a participant in Group 6, along with a “dictionary”. Different box colors represent
the four different shapes which appeared in the scenes, and the grey axes indicate the direction in which the shape was moving on the screen. Different font colors
represent different meaningful part-labels, as segmented by the authors for illustration purposes. For example, the label in the black circle (“hakima-hi-mwahp”) was
assigned to a scene in which shape 1 was moving in a 60° angle. It is comprised of several predictable parts: “hakima” indicates the type of shape which appeared in
the scene, and the additional “hi-mwahp” indicates the type of motion (up-right). This latter part-label can also be decomposed to two meaningful parts: “hi” stands
for “up” and “mwahp” stands for “right”.
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
160

PAGE 11
3.2. Meta-analysis results
Our meta-analysis was based on data from 24 groups: six small
groups that played the short version (the original data reported in Study
1), six small groups that played the extended version, and 12 big groups
that played the same extended version.
First, we replicated our findings that compositionality emerges
during communication by running the same model employed in Study 1
over data from all 24 groups (seeAppendix B). We found that, as pre-
dicted, there was a significant linear increase in linguistic structure over
rounds whether we examined only the first eight rounds (β = 4.65,
SE = 0.3, t = 15.4, p < 0.001), only the additional eight rounds
(β = 0.77, SE = 0.2, t = 3.7, p < 0.005), or all 16 rounds together
(β = 5.6, SE = 0.4, t = 13.6, p < 0.001). Notably, this increase in
structure leveled off in later rounds: the quadratic term was significant
during the first eight rounds (β = −0.74, SE = 0.2, t = −3.6,
p < 0.005), and also when all rounds were taken into account
(β = −2.4, SE = 0.2, t = −11.1, p < 0.001). Moreover, the effect of
round number was larger during the first eight rounds, as indicated by
the effect sizes (i.e., the models’ coefficients: 4.65 vs. 0.77). That is,
most of the increase in structure happened in the first eight rounds,
when the meaning space was still expanding and when participants
experienced an increase in the number of partners. Together, these
results consist a direct replication of the results we reported above for
the six original groups in Study 1, and strengthen our conclusion that
compositionality can indeed emerge in a closed group, without gen-
eration turnover. Moreover, they imply that our communicative pres-
sures played a role.
Next, we examined the separate contribution of our two commu-
nicative pressures – multiple partners and an expanding meaning space
– to the emergence of structure over time. To this end, we used mixed
effects models similar to the one reported above to predict the structure
scores at each round, with additional predictors for the number of
partners, the number of meanings, or both. First, we ran separate
models that added to the model with Round only one of the additional
factors as a predictor. Then, we ran a full model that added both new
predictors to the model, and compared the separate reduced models to
the full model using model comparisons (likelihood ratio tests). This
allowed us to examine the contribution of each additional predictor.
All models included a centered fixed effect for round number
(ranging from 0 to 16 before centering, linear and quadratic terms), and
had the same random effects structure which included random inter-
cepts and random slopes for the effect of round with respect to different
participants nested in different groups. In the separate models, we in-
cluded either a fixed effect for the Number of Scenes participants were
exposed to so far (ranging between 8 and 23 scenes before centering),
or a fixed effect for the Number of Partners participants interacted with
so far (ranging between 1 and 3 for the small groups and between 1 and
7 for the larger groups before centering). In the full model, all pre-
dictors were included. Even though these predictors are closely related,
the maximal Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) for all predictors in all
models was < 6, indicating that the collinearity of these models was
acceptable (seeKennedy, 1992; Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black,
1995).
Table 5
Meta-analysis model.
Estimate Std. Error t-value p-value
(Intercept) 0.535 0.018 28.891 < 0.001 ***
No. of Scenes 0.0001 0.002 0.0443 0.9646
No. of Partners 0.0407 0.006 6.3739 <0.001 ***
Round Number (linear) 3.1029 0.642 4.8317 <0.001 ***
Round Number (quad) −0.8866 0.447 −1.9824 0.0481 *
* < 0.05.
*** < 0.001.
Fig. 8.Summary statistics of structure score by the number of items (A) and the number of partners (B) to which participants were exposed. The colored lines
represent the different groups in the meta-analysis. The black line represents the models’ estimate, and its shading represent the models’ standard error. The number
of items ranged from 8 (during the group naming phase and round 1) to 23 (from round 6 onwards). The number of partners ranged from 0 (during the group naming
phase) to 3 (for small groups) or 7 (for big groups). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
161

PAGE 12
All models showed both linear and quadratic effects of Round, in-
dicating an increase in structure over rounds that leveled off in later
rounds. Moreover, the separate models showed that both factors were
significant positive predictors of linguistic structure on their own (see
Appendix B): Number of Partners had a strong effect on structure
(β = 0.04, SE = 0.005, t = 7.05, p < 0.001), and the Number of
Scenes did too albeit with a smaller effect size (β = 0.007, SE = 0.002,
t = 2.9, p < 0.01). Importantly, the full model was favored compared
to the model that included only the Number of Scenes (ΔAIC = 26,
p < 0.0001), but was similar to a model that included only the
Number of Partners (ΔAIC = 2, p = 0.96). Thus, this model comparison
showed that Number of Partners improved the model, while Number of
Scenes did not add a unique contribution. In support of this finding, the
full model showed that interacting with multiple people had a strong
positive effect on structure scores, while the expanding meaning space
did not (Table 5;Fig. 8): When all factors were included in the model,
structure scores significantly increased with the Number of Partners
(β = 0.04, SE = 0.006, t = 6.37, p < 0.001) but not with the Number
of Scenes (β = 0.0001, SE = 0.002, t = 0.04, p = 0.96). Together,
these results suggest that interacting with multiple people introduces a
stronger pressure for compositionality than an expanding meaning
space, and was the main driver for the emergence of compositionality in
our design.
4. General discussion
In this paper we tested whether compositionality, one of the hall-
marks of natural language, can emerge during communication given
compressibility pressures other than learning by new generations.Kirby
et al. (2015)argued that cross-generational transmission is crucial for
the emergence of compositionality. Here, we hypothesized that prop-
erties of real-world communication, namely, interacting with multiple
people on an expanding meaning space, could impose compressibility
pressures that would lead to the emergence of compositional languages
already in a single generation. We predicted that the need to converge
with different partners and the need to refer to more and more mean-
ings over time would give rise to structured, compositional languages
during communication in closed groups.
To examine this claim, we tested six micro-societies of four parti-
cipants each, who communicated in alternating pairs using an artificial
language to refer to an expanding meaning space. We found that the
languages developed in our micro-societies became significantly more
structured over rounds of interaction, and developed compositional
structure despite the absence of generational transmission. In parti-
cular, the micro-societies in our experiment developed languages in
which different affixes were systematically combined to express dif-
ferent meanings (seeFig. 7). Additionally, those languages became
more shared, more consistent, and more communicatively successful
across rounds. Participants converged on stable and structured lexicons
that allowed them to refer to new meanings with increasing efficiency:
as languages became more structured, labels for new scenes became
more predictable and stabilized faster. Our findings show that compo-
sitionality reliably emerges during communication without genera-
tional turnover, and advances our understanding of how communal
interaction shapes grammatical structure in the process of language
evolution and language change. We also conducted a meta-analysis
with data from 18 additional micro-societies of four or eight partici-
pants, which replicated our main finding and extended it to groups of
varying sizes: the additional groups also showed a significant increase
in linguistic structure during multiple communication rounds, and de-
veloped compositionality without transmission to new learners. Thus,
we have expanded on the theory brought forth inKirby et al. (2015)by
showing that natural properties of language use other than learning by
new members can give rise to strong compressibility pressures during
communication and therefore to compositional structure within a single
generation.
One immediate implication of these findings is that composition-
ality can emerge in a linguistic signal system within the first generation,
with no new learners needed. At first glance, these claims seem to be in
conflict with the conclusions drawn from studies on developing sign
languages and creoles, which stress the role of new learners in the
formation of linguistic structure in the real world (Aronoff, Meir,
Padden, & Sandler, 2008; Bickerton, 1984; Senghas & Coppola, 2001;
Senghas et al., 2004). However, developing sign languages and pidgins
clearly show evidence of sentence-level compositionality in the first
generation, as speakers re-use small units (i.e., words or gestures) to
create sentences and refer to complex events. For example, over a fifth
of the signers in the first cohort of the developing Nicaraguan Sign
Language showed compositionality in representing manner and path of
motion, and all first cohort signers were able to recombine different
signs to form sentences (Senghas et al., 2004). Moreover, composi-
tionality at the sentence-level is present already in home-sign (Goldin-
Meadow & Mylander, 1990), as well as in pidgin languages (Arends &
Bruyn, 1994). What seems to change in languages over the course of
generations is not the presence of compositionality per se, but rather
the degree of its regularity (e.g., word order) and the degree of more
fine-grained compositionality at the word-level (e.g., morphology). In
our miniature language, there is no meaningful difference between
sentence-level and word-level compositionality: descriptions in our
paradigm could be interpreted as single words with different affixes, or
alternatively as different words combined to a form a sentence (e.g.,
with a noun describing shape and a verb describing motion). Thus, our
conclusions are in line with findings from developing sign languages,
which also show that compositionality exists from very early stages.
A possible limitation of our study is that it is based on the behavior
of adult participants rather than children, who may differ from adults in
their biases and general cognitive skills. However, this limitation is
relatively weak for several reasons. First, while children are indeed the
prototypical majority of languageslearnersin real-world settings, they
are not the prototypical majority of languageusers. As such, adults have
been argued to play a larger role in the process of language innovation
and change compared to children, given that they typically have a
stronger social influence in the society (Labov, 2007; Nettle, 1999;
Roberts & Winters, 2012). Second, the same cognitive principles out-
lined here (i.e., memory limitations; the need to communicate suc-
cessfully) are likely to generalize to children as well. For example,
children as young as four already adapt to their interlocutors by taking
over structural and lexical forms used by their dialogue partners (e.g.,
Nilsenová & Nolting, 2010). Moreover, younger children are theoreti-
cally faced with an even stronger pressure for compressibility given
their inferior working memory (e.g.,Gathercole, Pickering, Ambridge,
& Wearing, 2004). Finally, a recent study compared children and
adults’ performance on an iterated language learning paradigm (similar
to that used inKirby et al., 2008), and found that children, like adults,
can create linguistic structure in artificial languages (Raviv & Arnon,
2018). While adults significantly outperformed children in all experi-
ments, children were able to create languages with simple systematic
structures similar to those created by adults and inKirby et al. (2008).
Even though children did not introduce compositionality in that para-
digm,Raviv & Arnon (2018)argue that children do not have qualita-
tively different structural biases compared to the adults, and show that
this difference can be attributed to children’s worse learning overall.
This study therefore suggests that our findings could be generalized to
children (or more naturally, to mixed groups of children and adults).
Importantly, our meta-analysis tested the relative contribution of
the two communicative pressures in our design, and revealed that
having multiple interaction partners introduced a stronger compressi-
bility pressure than the expanding meaning space. While both factors
were significant predictors of structure individually, the expanding
meaning space did not introduce an additional compressibility pressure
beyond the pressure introduced by the number of interaction partners.
In other words, while the need to discriminate between more and more
L. Raviv et al. Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
162

PAGE 13
items can lead to the emergence of more systematic structure (see also
Nölle et al., 2018), it seems to be less crucial when another strong
pressure for compressibility (i.e., interacting with multiple partners)
already exists. Together, this meta-analysis showed that interacting
with multiple people played a central role in shaping this pattern of
results, and could be considered as the main driver for the emergence of
compositionality in this paradigm. It is possible that a more extreme
manipulation of the expanding meaning space would yield a stronger
compressibility pressure. Future work could experimentally examine
the emergence of compositionality when only one of these pressures is
present, or use a computational model similar to the one used inKirby
et al. (2015)to examine the lower bound of each pressure and tweak
the extent to which new meanings and new partners are introduced.
One possible implication that can be drawn from these findings is
that cross-cultural differences in interaction patterns (e.g., group size)
can affect the formation of linguistic structure: given the strong effect of
having multiple communication partners, we predict that increasing the
number of communication partners (and therefore the degree of input
variability) will impose a stronger pressure for systemization and gen-
eralization, and should therefore result in languages with more lin-
guistic structure. This prediction resonates with models of language
evolution and language change: an increase in community size is ar-
gued to be one of the main drivers for the evolution of natural language
(Dunbar, 1993), and interaction with multiple people is argued to
promote the simplification of morphological structure (e.g.,Wray &
Grace, 2007). Moreover, this idea is supported by typological studies
showing that languages spoken by more people have more transparent
and more regular structures (e.g.,Lupyan & Dale, 2010). At the mo-
ment, there is no published experimental work on differences in lin-
guistic structure between groups of different sizes, but computational
models (e.g.,Dale & Lupyan, 2012; Reali & Griffiths, 2009) predict that
it can have dramatic effects on linguistic structure. Our paradigm
provides an efficient way to test the emergence of compositional lan-
guages with larger groups of interlocutors in laboratory settings, al-
lowing for the manipulation of features such as group size and com-
munity structure. We are currently examining how differences in
population size and network configuration may affect the emergence of
compositionality (Raviv, Meyer & Lev-Ari, under review).
5. Conclusion
The results of the experiment and the meta-analysis show that
languages can develop compositional structure over the course of
communication, even in the absence of generational transmission to
new learners. In particular, we found that when groups of participants
interacted with multiple partners, their languages became more com-
positionally structured, more stable and more communicatively suc-
cessful over time. This is the first demonstration that compositionality
can reliably emerge in an artificial language in a closed-group setting
and supports the idea that compressibility pressures can be imposed
during communication.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Caitlin Decuyper for programming the experi-
ment, and Gary Lupyan, Sean Roberts and Kevin Stadler for discussions
and helpful input.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online athttps://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.09.010.
References
Acerbi, A., Kendal, J., & Tehrani, J. J. (2017). Cultural complexity and demography: The
case of folktales.Evolution and Human Behavior, 38(4), 474–480.
Arends, J., & Bruyn, A. (1994). Gradualist and developmental hypotheses.Pidgins and
creoles: An introduction: Vol. 15, (pp. 111–120). John Benjamins Publishing.
Aronoff, M., Meir, I., Padden, C. A., & Sandler, W. (2008). The roots of linguistic orga-
nization in a new language.Interaction Studies, 9(1), 133–153.
Bates, D. M., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2016). lme4: Mixed-effects modeling
with R; 2010. URL: <http://lme4> .
Beckner, C., Blythe, R., Bybee, J., Christiansen, M. H., Croft, W., Ellis, N. C., ...
Schoenemann, T. (2009). Language is a complex adaptive system: Position paper.
Language Learning, 59(s1), 1–26.
Beckner, C., Pierrehumbert, J. B., & Hay, J. (2017). The emergence of linguistic structure
in an online iterated learning task.Journal of Language Evolutionlzx001.
Bentz, C., Alikaniotis, D., Cysouw, M., & Ferrer-i-Cancho, R. (2017). The entropy of
words—Learnability and expressivity across more than 1000 languages.Entropy,
19(6), 275.
Bickerton, D. (1984). The language bioprogram hypothesis.Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
7(2), 173–188.
Bickerton, D. (2007). Language evolution: A brief guide for linguists.Lingua, 117(3),
510–526.
Blom, E., Paradis, J., & Duncan, T. S. (2012). Effects of input properties, vocabulary size,
and L1 on the development of third person singular–s in child L2 English.Language
Learning, 62(3), 965–994.
Carr, J. W., Smith, K., Cornish, H., & Kirby, S. (2017). The cultural evolution of structured
languages in an open-ended, continuous world.Cognitive Science, 41(4), 892–923.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2016). The now-or-never bottleneck: A fundamental
constraint on language.Behavioral and Brain Sciences,39.
Culbertson, J., & Kirby, S. (2016). Simplicity and specificity in language: Domain-general
biases have domain-specific effects.Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1964.
Dale, R., & Lupyan, G. (2012). Understanding the origins of morphological diversity: The
linguistic niche hypothesis.Advances in Complex Systems, 15(03n04), 1150017.
De Beule, J., & Bergen, B. K. (2006). On the emergence of compositionality.Proceedings of
the 6th international conference on the evolution of language(pp. 35–42)..
Deacon, T. (1997).The symbolic species.London: Penguin.
Dunbar, R. I. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and language in humans.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16(4), 681–694.
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (2010). The interactive evolution of
human communication systems.Cognitive Science, 34(3), 351–386.
Fehér, O., Wonnacott, E., & Smith, K. (2016). Structural priming in artificial languages
and the regularisation of unpredictable variation.Journal of Memory and Language,
91, 158–180.
Galantucci, B., & Garrod, S. (2011). Experimental semiotics: A review.Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 5, 11.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T. (2007). Foundations of re-
presentation: Where might graphical symbol systems come from?Cognitive Science,
31(6), 961–987.
Gathercole, S. E., Pickering, S. J., Ambridge, B., & Wearing, H. (2004). The structure of
working memory from 4 to 15 years of age.Developmental Psychology, 40(2), 177.
Goldberg, A. E. (1999). The emergence of the semantics of argument structure con-
structions.The Emergence of Language,197–212.
Goldin-Meadow, S., & Mylander, C. (1990). Beyond the input given: The child's role in the
acquisition of language.Language,323–355.
Gómez, R. L. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant structure.Psychological
Science, 13(5), 431–436.
Gong, T., Ke, J., Minett, J. W., & Wang, W. S. (2004). A computational framework to
simulate the coevolution of language and social structure. In J. Pollack, M. Bedau, P.
Husbands, T. Ikegami, & R. A. Watson (Eds.).Artificial life IX: Proceedings of the 9th
international conference on the simulation and synthesis of living systems(pp. 158–164).
MIT Press.
Hair, J. F., Jr., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1995).Multivariate data
analysis(3rd ed.). New York: Macmillan.
Halekoh, U., & Højsgaard, S. (2014). A kenward-roger approximation and parametric
bootstrap methods for tests in linear mixed models–the R package pbkrtest.Journalof
Statistical Software, 59(9), 1–32.
Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech.Scientific American, 203(3), 88–97.
Jackendoff, R. (1999). Possible stages in the evolution of the language capacity.Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3(7), 272–279.
Kennedy, P. (1992).A guide to econometrics.Oxford: Blackwell.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the labora-
tory: An experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(31), 10681–10686.
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T., & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated learning and the evolution of lan-
guage.Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 28, 108–114.
Kirby, S., & Hurford, J. R. (2002). The emergence of linguistic structure: An overview of
the iterated learning model.Simulating the evolution of language(pp. 121–147).
London: Springer.
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015). Compression and communication
in the cultural evolution of linguistic structure.Cognition, 141, 87–102.
Kuhl, P. K. (2004). Early language acquisition: Cracking the speech code.Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 5(11), 831–843.
Labov, W. (2007). Transmission and diffusion.Language,344–387.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance of shape in early lexical
learning.Cognitive Development, 3(3), 299–321.
Lev-Ari, S., & Shao, Z. (2017). How social network heterogeneity facilitates lexical access
and lexical prediction.Memory & Cognition, 45(3), 528–538.
Lively, S. E., Logan, J. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1993). Training Japanese listeners to identify
English/r/and/l/. II: The role of phonetic environment and talker variability in
L. Raviv et al.
Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
163

PAGE 14
learning new perceptual categories.The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
94(3), 1242–1255.
Lupyan, G., & Dale, R. (2010). Language structure is partly determined by social struc-
ture.PloS one, 5(1), e8559.
Maye, J., Werker, J. F., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant sensitivity to distributional in-
formation can affect phonetic discrimination.Cognition, 82(3), B101–B111.
Mirolli, M., & Parisi, D. (2008). How producer biases can favor the evolution of com-
munication: An analysis of evolutionary dynamics.Adaptive Behavior, 16(1), 27–52.
Motamedi, Y., Schouwstra, M., Smith, K., & Kirby, S. (2016). Linguistic structure emerges
in the cultural evolution of artificial sign languages.The evolution of language:
Proceedings of the 11th international conference (EVOLANG11)(pp. 493–495)..
Nettle, D. (1999). Using social impact theory to simulate language change.Lingua,108(2),
95–117.
Nettle, D. (2012). Social scale and structural complexity in human languages.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 367(1597), 1829–1836.
Nilsenová, M., & Nolting, P. (2010). Linguistic adaptation in semi-natural dialogues: age
comparison.Proceedings of the 13th international conference ontext, speech and dialogue
(pp. 531–538). Berlin: Springer (September).
Nölle, J., Staib, M., Fusaroli, R., & Tylén, K. (2018). The emergence of systematicity: How
environmental and communicative factors shape a novel communication system.
Cognition, 181, 93–104.
Perry, L. K., Axelsson, E. L., & Horst, J. S. (2016). Learning what to remember: Vocabulary
knowledge and children's memory for object names and features.Infant and Child
Development, 25(4), 247–258.
Perry, L. K., Samuelson, L. K., Malloy, L. M., & Schiffer, R. N. (2010). Learn locally, think
globally: Exemplar variability supports higher-order generalization and word
learning.Psychological science, 21(12), 1894–1902.
R Core Team (2016).A language and environment for statistical computing.Vienna, Austria:
R Foundation for Statistical Computing.http://www.R-project.org/.
Raviv, L., & Arnon, I. (2018). Systematicity, but not compositionality: Examining the
emergence of linguistic structure in children and adults using iterated learning.
Cognition, 181, 160–173.
Raviv, L., Meyer, A., & Lev-Ari, S. (2017).Compositional structure can emerge without
generational transmission. Paper presented at the 30th CUNY conference on human sen-
tence processing, Cambridge MA, USA, March 30–April 1, 2017.
Raviv, L., Meyer, A. & Lev-Ari, S. (under review). Larger communities create more
structured languages.
Reali, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). The evolution of frequency distributions: Relating
regularization to inductive biases through iterated learning.Cognition, 111(3),
317–328.
Roberts, S., & Winters, J. (2012). Social structure and language structure: The new no-
mothetic approach.Psychology of Language and Communication, 16(2), 89–112.
Rost, G. C., & McMurray, B. (2009). Speaker variability augments phonological processing
in early word learning.Developmental Science, 12(2), 339–349.
Rost, G. C., & McMurray, B. (2010). Finding the signal by adding noise: The role of
noncontrastive phonetic variability in early word learning.Infancy: The Official
Journal of the International Society on Infant Studies, 15(6).
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun vocabularies: Do ontology, category
structure and syntax correspond?Cognition, 73(1), 1–33.
Scott-Phillips, T. C. (2017). A (simple) experimental demonstration that cultural evolu-
tion is not replicative, but reconstructive—and an explanation of why this difference
matters.Journal of Cognition and Culture, 17(1–2), 1–11.
Selten, R., & Warglien, M. (2007). The emergence of simple languages in an experimental
coordination game.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(18),
7361–7366.
Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (2001). Children creating language: How Nicaraguan Sign
Language acquired a spatial grammar.Psychological Science, 12(4), 323–328.
Senghas, A., Kita, S., & Ozyurek, A. (2004). Children creating core properties of language:
Evidence from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua.Science, 305(5691),
1779–1782.
Smith, K. (2011). Learning bias, cultural evolution of language, and the biological evo-
lution of the language faculty.Human Biology, 83(2), 261–278.
Smith, K., Brighton, H., & Kirby, S. (2003). Complex systems in language evolution: The
cultural emergence of compositional structure.Advances in Complex Systems, 6(04),
537–558.
Smith, K., & Wonnacott, E. (2010). Eliminating unpredictable variation through iterated
learning.Cognition, 116(3), 444–449.
Theisen, C. A., Oberlander, J., & Kirby, S. (2010). Systematicity and arbitrariness in novel
communication systems.Interaction Studies, 11(1), 14–32.
Trehub, S. E. (2015). Cross-cultural convergence of musical features.Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 112(29), 8809–8810.
Verhoef, T., Walker, E., & Marghetis, T. (2016). Cognitive biases and social coordination
in the emergence of temporal language.The38thannualmeetingofthecognitive science
society (CogSci 2016)(pp. 2615–2620). .
Winters, J., Kirby, S., & Smith, K. (2015). Languages adapt to their contextual niche.
Language and Cognition, 7(3), 415–449.
Wray, A., & Grace, G. W. (2007). The consequences of talking to strangers: Evolutionary
corollaries of socio-cultural influences on linguistic form.Lingua, 117(3), 543–578.
Xu, J., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2013). Cultural transmission results in convergence
towards colour term universals.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,
280(1758), 20123073.
Xu, Y., Malt, B. C., & Srinivasan, M. (2017). Evolution of word meanings through me-
taphorical mapping: Systematicity over the past millennium.Cognitive Psychology, 96,
41–53.
Zlatev, J. (2008). From proto-mimesis to language: Evidence from primatology and social
neuroscience.Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102(1), 137–151.
L. Raviv et al.
Cognition 182 (2019) 151–164
164