PAGE 1
Young children spontaneously recreate core properties
of language in a new modality
Manuel Bohn a,b,1,2, Gregor Kachel c,1, and Michael Tomasello d,e
aDepartment of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; bLeipzig Research Center for Early Child Development, Leipzig University, 04109
Leipzig, Germany; cFaculty of Educational Sciences, Leipzig University, 04109 Leipzig, Germany; dDepartment of Developmental and Comparative
Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; and eDepartment of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke
University, Durham, NC 27708
Edited by Susan A. Gelman, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, and approved October 28, 2019 (received for review March 24, 2019)
How the world ’s 6,000 + natural languages have arisen is mostly
unknown. Yet, new sign languages have emerged recently among
deaf people brought together in a community, offering insights
into the dynamics of language evolution. However, documenting
the emergence of these languages has mostly consisted of study-
ing the end product; the process by which ad hoc signs are trans-
formed into a structured communication system has not been
directly observed. Here we sho w how young children create
new communication systems that exhibit core features of natural
languages in less than 30 min. In a controlled setting, we blocked
the possibility of using spoken language. In order to communicate
novel messages, including abstract concepts, dyads of children
spontaneously created novel gestural signs. Over usage, these
signs became increasingly arbitrary and conventionalized. When
confronted with the need to communicate more complex mean-
ings, children began to grammatically structure their gestures. To-
gether with previous work, these results suggest that children
have the basic skills necessary, not only to acquire a natural lan-
guage, but also to spontaneously create a new one. The speed
with which children create these structured systems has profound
implications for theorizing about language evolution, a process
which is generally thought to spa n across many generations, if
not millennia.
language | evolution | gesture | cognitive development
O
ne of the great discoveries in the human sciences in recent
decades is the finding that, when spatially isolated deaf
persons are brought together into a community, they rapidly
create a full-fledged conventional language in the gestural mo-
dality (1–3). Given that natural languages presumably took many
millennia to evolve, it is startling that contemporary social groups,
including groups of children, are able to do something similar in
only a few generations. The original discovery focused on deaf
children brought together in an educational setting and involved
several cohorts over a number of years, but subsequent research
has identified other instances in which such a community was
formed in different ways (4). The fact that this process invariably
takes place in the gestural modality—along with observations that
reference is more readily established in gesture than vocalization
(5, 6) —suggests that perhaps human linguistic communication
originated in gesture (7).
The documentation of newly created sign systems has pro-
vided invaluable insights into the process of language emergence.
First of all, language-like communication can arise without a
language model. Deaf children born to hearing parents who do
not receive any sign language instruction develop communication
systems—called homesign—that share core features with spoken
languages (8 –11). Second, when these homesigners are brought
together in a community, they rapidly converge on a conventional
communication system (1, 3, 12). Finally, these systems change over
time, and children who are exposed to them at a younger age end
up with more complex and structured systems as adults (13, 14).
However, the study of newly emerging sign languages has
mostly been a process of natural observation of the end product,
and the actual process of creation has never been directly ob-
served. Furthermore, naturalistic settings precluded experimental
manipulation of the process. The latter point has been partially
addressed by artificial language-learning studies. In experiments
with speaking participants, researchers have studied how adults
and children transmit artificial sign systems across generations
(e.g., refs. 15 and 16). This approach has illuminated some of the
dynamics of cultural language evolution. For example, languages
become more compositionally structured over generations and, as
a consequence, are easier to learn (15, 17). Somewhat at odds with
the naturalistic observations described above, researchers in this
tradition have found that children do not spontaneously structure
artificial languages in a compositional way (16). Presumably, this is
due to the high demands associated with learning an artificial
language in the first place. More naturalistic paradigms, for exam-
ple, using gesture instead of arbitrary symbols, might be more likely
to evoke compositional structure in children (18). Yet, like the
studies on newly emerging sign languages, studies on experimental
language evolution do not answer the question of how (and how
fast) a language-like communication system may spontaneously
arise out of signals created ad hoc during social interaction.
Here we study the incipient steps of the emergence of novel
communications systems in a comprehensive way. Our study design
Significance
Human social and cultural life rests on a unique set of com-
municative abilities. Newly emerging communication systems
provide a window into the cognitive and interactional basis of
these skills. In a muted video call setup, children were required
to convey meaning to a partner while being unable to use
spoken language. The gestural code systems that children
created ad hoc within a 30-min test session exhibited core
features of natural language and emergent sign languages:
referential signals for objects, actions, and abstract concepts,
conventional use of these signals, and grammatical structure.
These results demonstrate that language-like communication
systems can emerge rapidly out of social interaction.
Author contributions: M.B., G.K., and M.T. designed research; M.B. and G.K. performed
research; M.B. analyzed data; and M.B., G.K., and M.T. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: A version of SI Appendix is available at https://manuelbohn.github.io/
ges3000/ges3000.html. Stimulus pictures, data files, and analysis scripts are available at
https://github.com/manuelbohn/ges3000.
1M.B. and G.K. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: manuel.bohn@uni-leipzig.de.
This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1904871116/-/DCSupplemental.
First published December 2, 2019.
26072–26077 | PNAS | December 17, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 51 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1904871116
Downloaded at MPI f. evolutionäre Anthropologie on December 23, 2019 

PAGE 2
unites the strength of previous approaches: In a controlled labo-
ratory setting, participants played a reference game in which one
child had to communicate the content of a picture to another
child. While we blocked the possibility of using spoken language,
children were free to use whatever form of communicating that
they deemed suitable. By varying the complexity of the scenes
depicted in the pictures that had to be communicated, we were
able to study the influence of communicative pressures on the
developing gestural code systems. In order to approximate the
cognitive prerequisites for the creation of novel communication
systems, we included children of different ages.
In the following described experiments, we used this approach
to test if children recreate core properties of language: refer-
entiality, conventionality, arbitrariness, and grammatical struc-
ture. As a first step, we tested how children establish reference in
a new modality. Next, we asked if children could use their newly
established mode of communication to communicate abstract
concepts. Then we investigated the temporal dynamics of the
process, that is, whether communicative partners converge on a set
of conventional signals and whether signals become more arbitrary
over time. Finally, we investigated when and how children use
compositional structure to communicate more complex meanings.
Results
Initiation of Communication and Uptake of Signaling.Dyads of 4- and
6-y-old children engaged in a communication game in which a
sender had to communicate the content of a picture to a recipient.
Participants were situated in different rooms, interconnected by an
audio-video channel (akin to a video call; Fig. 1). In each room, a
set of 5 candidate pictures were placed on a wooden board ( SI
Appendix,F i g .S 2). After a short training in which the children
could convey the meaning verbally to establish common ground,
the experimenter cut the audio connection and children continued
playing the game without any further instructions. This situation
(initiation phase) allowed us to assess whether children would
spontaneously find a new way to express the content of the picture.
Apart from one unsuccessful attempt to use lip reading, chil-
dren used iconic gestures. If children did not spontaneously es-
tablish successful communication, experimenters provided stepwise
prompts.
The majority of 6-y-olds spontaneously had already produced
gestures in trial 1, more so compared to 4-y-olds (trial 1:β = −4.01,
SE = 1.3, P < 0.001; trials 1 to 4: β = −4.35, SE = 1.14, P < 0.001)
(Fig. 2A ). Even though 4-y-olds initially needed prompts to
produce gestures, they needed fewer prompts in later trials,
showing that they transferred the idea of iconically depicting a
referent to new pictures (main effect of trial: β = −2.76, SE = 1,
P = 0.002). Thus, while both age groups successfully adopted a
novel means of communication (iconic gestures) to coordinate,
6-y-olds did so independently. In a follow-up study, we tested 3-
and 4-y-olds in the same setup but with an adult comprehension
partner. Replicating the previous results, we found that 4-y-olds
did not initially create iconic gestures but quickly transferred this
mode of communication to new pictures. Three-year-olds, on the
other hand, needed prompts from the experimenter for each new
picture and independently produced gestures only when the pic-
tures were repeated (see SI Appendix for detailed results). Taken
together, we found a salient developmental pattern: Six-year-olds
spontaneously invented novel referential signs. Four-year-olds
quickly adopted a new mode of communication and used it pro-
ductively to create novel gestures. Three-year-olds, however, im-
itated model solutions and had to be introduced to novel
meanings in a piecemeal fashion.
Toward the end of the game, children switched roles. The
sender became the recipient and vice versa (uptake phase). At
that point, children of both ages spontaneously used iconic ges-
tures from trial 1 onward ( SI Appendix, Fig. S3 B), often adopting
the signs that their partner invented (see below). There was no
difference between age groups at trial 1 ( P = 0.093, Wilcoxon
test). Furthermore, fewer 4-y-olds needed prompts in trial 1
during this phase as compared to the initial phase of the ex-
periment ( β = −3.09, SE = 1.21, P = 0.002). These results show
that, once one child established a way of referring to the pictures,
the other child easily picked it up.
Turning to comprehension, we found that gestures were un-
derstood at a very high rate (Fig. 2B and SI Appendix , Fig. S4 ).
Comprehension of the gestures improved with trial ( β = 2.85,
SE = 1.29, P = 0.003) and was slightly better in uptake compared
to initiation ( β = 2.16, SE = 1.17, P = 0.045).
 We found no
difference between age groups ( β = 0.79, SE = 1.00, P = 0.456).
This shows that children generally depicted the content of the
pictures in a way that was comprehensible to their partner.
Communicating Abstract Concepts. The pictures used in the first 4
trials all depicted concrete and familiar actions on objects. To
see if children would be able to communicate more abstract
concepts, we introduced a plain white picture ( “nothing” or
“empty”) over the course of the session. Both 4- and 6-y-olds
spontaneously produced intentional gestures for this item and
did not differ in the respective rates (initiation: P = 0.093; up-
take: P = 0.217; Wilcoxon test). Prototypic solutions were os-
tensibly standing still (doing “nothing”) or shaking one ’s head.
Comprehension partners understood these gestures at a rate
above chance (all P < 0.01, except for 4-y-olds in the initiation
phase, P = 0.489, Wilcoxon test), presumably by eliminating the
other pictures as referents for the new gestures. Rate of com-
prehension was higher for 6-y-olds (β = 2.94, SE = 1.43, P = 0.004)
and during the uptake part (β = 3.51, SE = 1.32, P < 0.001). Thus,
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the general setup. Children were placed in different rooms and communicated via a video channel. Candidate pictures were
presented on a wooden board.
Bohn et al. PNAS | December 17, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 51 | 26073
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Downloaded at MPI f. evolutionäre Anthropologie on December 23, 2019 

PAGE 3
children were able to successfully communicate more abstract
concepts using newly created gestures. In later experiments (see
section Grammatical Constructions and Communicative Pressure )
children also created separate gestures for abstract relational
concepts such as “big.”
Conventionalization. A signature of mature languages is conven-
tionality: speakers within a community use the same signs for a
given referent. In emerging sign languages, conventionality emerges
only once homesigners join in larger communities (3). Here, to
assess whether children within a dyad used more similar gestures
than children from different dyads, we asked naive adults to make
similarity judgments for gestures from the same dyad compared to
gestures from a different dyad. For both age groups, raters judged
gestures from the same dyad to be more similar (both P < 0.001,
Fig. 2C). In direct comparison, gestures were rated slightly more
similar for 6- compared to 4-y-olds ( β = 0.78, SE = 0.39, P =
0.049). Nevertheless, both age groups produced more similar
gestures within than between dyads. (Fig. 2C and SI Appendix ,
Fig. S5 ). Partners adopted the sender ’s sign, copying even for
subtle differences. As senders generally comprehended signs
that they had just used, copying greatly increased successful
communication.
Drift to the Arbitrary. Spoken languages involve mostly arbitrary
mappings of form and meaning. Individual homesigners rely
mostly on iconic signs (3). Signed languages also start out with a
large number of iconic signs which become more arbitrary over
time (19, 20). This reflects a general tendency for human com-
munication systems to “drift to the arbitrary ” (7). We investi-
gated this process in 2 ways: For production, we asked whether
gestures produced later in the experiment were more arbitrary
compared to earlier gestures. For comprehension, we tested whether
children would continue to recognize the meaning of a gesture when
its form rapidly drifted from highly iconic to completely arbitrary.
To see if children ’s gestures become more arbitrary over time,
we compared the first and the last gesture for a given picture
from each child. Raters were instructed to select the gesture that
they deemed more abstract (i.e., less evocative of the picture).
An explanation for gestures drifting to the arbitrary over time is
that iconic elements are dropped from the gesture to save effort
as they become unnecessary for efficient communication. There-
fore, we also asked raters to indicate which gesture was more ef-
fortful. As children participated in up to only 5 trials with each
picture (4-y-olds in up to only 3 trials), we invited children back on
a second day and repeated the procedure with fewer pictures ( SI
Appendix,F i g .S 6) and more repetitions. Raters judged later ges-
tures to be less transparent and more abstract with regard to their
form (Fig. 2D and SI Appendix,F i g .S 7A). We analyzed the in-
fluence of age and effort on abstractness ratings separately for
each day. The later gestures of 6-y-olds were rated as more ab-
stract more often compared to those of 4-y-olds on day 1 (β = 0.56,
SE = 0.23, P = 0.019). Rater judgments of how abstract forms
appeared to them were strongly influenced by ratings of perceived
effort (β = −2.30, SE = 0.17, P < 0.001, Fig. 2E ). On day 2, ab-
stractness ratings were again strongly influenced by effort ( β =
−2.69, SE = 0.22, P < 0.001) but, in contrast to day 1, not by age
(β = 0.02, SE = 0.30, P = 0.95). This suggests that arbitrariness of a
gesture depends on how often it has been used rather than on the
age of the gesturer (6-y-olds received more trials with each picture
on day 1 but not on day 2). The effect for abstractness ratings was
rather small, and later gestures were still highly iconic. Never-
theless, we found evidence that children ’s production shifted to-
ward more arbitrary mappings between sign and referent over just
a few iterations with the same partner.
To investigate comprehension, we paired children with a scripted
adult partner. The adult started out with highly iconic gestures,
but produced more and more arbitrary gestures over time until the
gestures were completely arbitrary (see associated online re-
pository for sample videos). The arbitrariness of the final gestures
was validated in a control group of children who were presented
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1234
Trial
Spontaneous gestures
A
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Initiation Uptake
Phase
Comprehension
B
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.8 1.0 1.2
Gesture same dyad
C
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.8 1.0 1.2
Later gesture
D
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Effort
Arbitrariness
E
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Control Test
Phase
Proportion correct
F
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00Prop. differentiated
G
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Holistic Compositional
Gesture type
Prop. correct
H
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Lower Higher
Relational complexity
Prop. compositional
I
Age
4yo
6yo
8yo
Fig. 2. Results for experiments on creation of novel
communication systems ( A–F) and use of grammati-
cal structure ( G–I). ( A) Dyads who spontaneously
produced gestures in the first 4 trials, each of which
involved a different picture. ( B) Comprehension of
gestures in the initiation (before role switch) and
uptake phase. ( C) Rate at which naive raters judged
gestures from the same dyad to be more similar
compared to gestures from a different dyad. ( D) Rate
at which raters judged later gestures to be more
arbitrary. ( E) Relation between ratings of arbitrari-
ness and effort. ( F) Rate of comprehension of arbi-
trary gestures by children who witness the form drift
to arbitrary (test) and children who see only the final,
arbitrary gesture (control). ( G) Rate of differentiation
across conditions. ( H) Comprehension for gestures
composed of either a single holistic gesture or a
compositional gesture sequence. ( I) Proportion of
compositional gesture sequences by relation com-
plexity. “Lower” refers to conditions with one mod-
ifying predicate (movement, number, and size) and
“Higher” to transitive actions between 2 agents
(transitive 2 and 3). In B–I, jittered transparent dots
represent individual means, diamonds show group
means, and vertical lines show 95% CIs. Dashed lines
in B, D,a n d F denote performance expected by
chance.
26074 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1904871116 Bohn et al.
Downloaded at MPI f. evolutionäre Anthropologie on December 23, 2019 

PAGE 4
with the same arbitrary signs but without having shared the in-
teraction with the partner. Chil dren who witnessed the gestures
become arbitrary over time selected the correct picture above
chance (Fig. 2F and SI Appendix,T a b l eS 3)a n dd i ds om o r eo f t e n
than children in the control group (β = 1.35, SE = 0.56, P = 0.013),
with no difference between age groups ( β = 0.20, SE = 0.53, P =
0.710). Children of both ages successfully retained the meaning of
a gesture when its form gradually drifted from iconic to arbitrary.
It is noteworthy that children ’s comprehension was consistently
accurate across trials, which indicates that they reidentified ges-
tures rather than interpreting each alteration of a gesture as a new
sign and failing to map it to the intended referent (cf. ref. 21).
Grammatical Constructions and Communicative Pressure. Next, we
studied if and how 6- and 8-y-old children would impose gram-
matical structure onto their gestures when asked to communicate
more complex meanings. Instead of differentiating between dis-
tinct referents, children were asked to disambiguate between de-
pictions of the same referent with varying properties. We asked if
children would spontaneously create compositional gesture se-
quences reminiscent of grammatical constructions. To qualify as a
gesture sequence, the utterance had to be composed of separate
meaningful gestures that could flexibly be recombined to com-
municate diverse meanings.
In a first step, we tested if children would produce sequences
in which separate gestures are used to denote properties of
referents. For example, when asked to contrast a big with a small
duck, we wanted to see if children would produce a separate
gesture for “big” and a separate gesture for “duck.” We classified
such sequences as compositional because the individual gestures
denoting properties and referents could be recombined to
communicate different meanings (the same gesture for “big”
could be used to communicate about a big fork). Here we tested
3 conditions ( SI Appendix, Figs. S9 and S12 ): In “movement,” we
contrasted moving vs. static referents. In “number,” pictures
differed in numerosity (one vs. many). In “size,” we contrasted
big and small depictions of the same referent. In a second step, we
asked if children would further syntactically structure gesture se-
quences to communicate relations between referents. That is,
would children use different structures when communicating
“monkey chases cat” compared to “cat chases monkey.” We con-
ducted trials under 2 conditions, transitive 2 and transitive 3 ( SI
Appendix,F i g .S 1 5): In transitive 2, we showed transitive ac-
tions (e.g., chasing) between 2 agents. Transitive 3 involved the
same transitive actions between 2 agents but involved 3 possible
interactants in total (see SI Appendix for details). In both steps,
we contrasted the production of gesture sequences with the use
of holistic gestures in which the property (or relation) was part of
the depiction of the referent itself (e.g., marking a duck as big by
extensively flapping the arms).
Across steps and conditions, we asked the following questions:
1) Do children differentiate between referents with different
properties or relations and what affects the rate of differentiation?
2) When are compositional sequences used rather than holistic
gestures? 3) How do compositional sequences affect comprehen-
sion? 4) Is the structure in children’s gesture sequences influenced
by the structure of their native language? Age effects were tested
on the data from movement, number, and size. An additional
analysis included data from 8-y-olds in all 5 conditions. The focus
w a so ng e s t u r ep r o d u c t i o n ,a n ds ow ep a i r e dc h i l d r e nw i t ha n
adult comprehension partner.
First, we looked at the rate of differentiation across condi-
tions. That is, we asked if children made any attempt to express
the property of, or relation between, referents. In the transitive 2
and 3 conditions, differentiation also involved specifying the
role of the characters involved, and children thus had to use
syntactic structure to do so. Children differentiated in the ma-
jority of trials (Fig. 2G and SI Appendix , Fig. S18 ). The rate of
differentiation did not differ across conditions ( P = 0.190 both
age groups and P = 0.139 for 8-y-olds) or between age groups
(β = 0.97, SE = 0.63, P = 0.112). Results by condition can be
found in SI Appendix .
Next we asked what influenced children ’s use of compositional
gesture sequences as opposed to holistic gestures. Depicting a
single property of a referent (its movement, number, or size) is
possible by modifying an already existing gesture for the referent.
On the other hand, expressing a transitive relation between 2
agents requires specifying the agent and patient, respectively. We
expected children to first produce separate gestures for agent,
patient, and predicate and then convert the transitive relation
between agent and patient into a temporal one, thus specifying the
interactional roles via the order in which they produce the ges-
tures. Doing so results in a gesture sequence with syntactical
structure, in which the same gestures were used in a different
order to express different mean ings. In order to create these
sequences, children had to create separate gestures for subject,
predicate, and object. As a consequence, we expected 8-y-olds to
use more compositional gesture sequences in transitive 2 and 3
conditions compared to the other 3 conditions.
First, we analyzed the data for both age groups. Somewhat at
odds with our prediction, children were more likely to use gesture
sequences in size compared to movement ( β = −1.
97, SE = 0.74,
P = 0.008) or number ( β = −2.00, SE = 0.73, P = 0.006). Fur-
thermore, older children were more likely to use gesture se-
quences (β = 1.36, SE = 0.62, P = 0.022). In SI Appendix,w eo f f e r
a post hoc explanation of why size produced more compositional
gesture sequences. We used the data from 8-y-olds to directly test
if gestures for transitive actions were more likely to be commu-
nicated using a compositional gesture sequence than via holistic
gestures. We classified conditions showing transitive actions
(transitive 2 and 3: 2 arguments) as high relational complexity and
conditions involving only a single modifying predicate (movement,
number, and size: 1 argument) as low relational complexity.
Gesture sequences were more frequent in conditions with high
compared to low relational complexity ( β = 2.05, SE = 0.71, P =
0.001, Fig. 2 I). This pattern confirms our initial hypothesis that
children use structure to cope with increased complexity (i.e., a
larger number of agents and relations) in the scene to be depicted.
Next we directly tested this compensatory relation by asking
whether compositional gesture sequences reduced ambiguity and
improved comprehension.
Both holistic and compositional gestures were understood at
high rates (Fig. 2H and SI Appendix , Fig. S20 ). However, com-
positional gestures were better understood. This was the case
when analyzing the data for both age groups in movement,
number, and size ( β = 3.64, SE = 1.1, P < 0.001) as well as when
analyzing all 5 conditions for 8-y-olds ( β = 1.99, SE = 0.8, P =
0.006). Compositional gesture sequences were almost always
understood, which illustrates how structure reduced ambiguity.
Final analyses tested whether the internal structure that chil-
dren impose on their gesture sequences was influenced by their
native language (German). Regardless of condition, for each trial
with a gesture sequence, we coded whether the word order was the
same as in German. We used the active present tense as the ref-
erence. For movement, number, and size, the corresponding
German word order was predicate –subject (PS) [movement:
“hüpfender Elefant ” (jumping elephant); number: “viele Häm-
mer” (many hammers); size: “kleine Gabel” (small fork)]. In the
case of transitive 2 and 3, it was subject –predicate–object (SPO)
[“Hase jagt Katze ” (
bunny chases cat)]. Because the majority of
the world ’s natural languages put subject before object (22), we
focused on the positioning of the predicate instead (see refs. 23–25
for the same approach). We found no substantial evidence for
German word order ( β = 0.5, SE = 0.31, P = 0.105) and no dif-
ference in the rate of German word order across conditions ( P =
0.534). This corroborates previous work with adults showing that
Bohn et al. PNAS | December 17, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 51 | 26075
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Downloaded at MPI f. evolutionäre Anthropologie on December 23, 2019 

PAGE 5
structure in gesture is independent of grammatical structure in
spoken language (23 –25). Overall, variation rather than preset
principles characterized children’s creation of gesture sequences
showing that children spontaneously structured their gestures to
solve a communicative problem.
Discussion
The studies described here demonstrate the resilience of chil-
dren’s communicative abilities (3). Children spontaneously used
iconic gestures to initiate communication. They also invented
gestures for abstract concepts. All gestures were readily understood
by comprehension partners, and when it was their turn to com-
municate, they used the same gestures that their partner had in-
troduced. Over time, children produced more arbitrary gestures.
When confronted with gestures that rapidly drifted from highly
iconic to arbitrary, children retained the meaning. When asked to
communicate more complex meanings, children began to impose
compositional structure on their signals. This structure was inde-
pendent from their native language.
We found that the reduction in iconicity over time was largely
explained by a decrease in production effort. This suggests that
efficiency and usability shape language change. In support of this
idea, iterated learning studies found that children reduce com-
plexity when transmitting random dot patterns across genera-
tions (26). The results were patterns that were easier to use and
to learn. Similarly, studies with adults show that, over time,
adults produce signals that are easier to use even at the expense
of clarity (27). While the introduction of ambiguity over time
might seem counterintuitive, ambiguity can be seen as a feature
of efficient communication systems (28). Signals do not have to
be tightly coupled with a given referent (easing production and
allowing reuse) when contextual information is available and
social aspects of the interaction compensate for an increase in
ambiguity. We showed that, when presented with rapid changes in
a set of gestures from highly iconic to arbitrary, children are able
to follow these changes and still comprehend the altered symbols
at high rates. The meaning of the gesture is not just a function of
the signal that is being used but also of the conversational history
(common ground) (29, 30). Ambiguity is reduced by“outsourcing”
information to common ground. In line with this idea, we saw that
children used the same gestures for a referent and thereby
established a local convention. Conventions are another way of
leveraging the accumulation of shared information over the course
of a social interaction. Natural languages can be thought of as
local conventions that have been lifted to the group level (7).
Children in our study spontaneously imposed structure onto
their gesture sequences. This finding echoes earlier work in which
children were asked to use gestures to describe motion events
(18). However, compositional g esture sequences were not a
default but rather a consequence of an increase in relational
complexity in the scene to be communicated. Holistic signals are
constrained in their expressive power, especially when it comes to
expressing relations between objects and agents. Importantly, the
structure that children imposed was unrelated to their native
language, suggesting that it was not the by-product of a mediating
linguistic representation (23–25). These results show that compo-
sitional structure in communication not only emerges to increase
fidelity and learnability, but also can be intentionally used as a tool
to reduce ambiguity in the signal.
There are several ways in which the work should be extended.
First of all, a greater variation of the stimulus material and the
context should be used to test the generalizability of the results.
Even though we found that children would spontaneously struc-
ture their gestures, we do not know if and how this structure is
further modified when the communication system is transmitted
across generations and/or used in larger groups. Based on prior
work we would predict that structure would increase even further
(13, 15, 17, 31). Assuming a ceiling effect on the degree to which a
system can be compositionally structured, we would expect that
emerging communication systems that start out in a structured way
are less prone to change over time compared to systems that rely
on holistic signals.
Across experiments, we found that 6-y-old children were able
to quickly recreate core properties of a conventional, abstract, and
structured communication system. Even though 8-y-olds produced
more compositional gestures, th e performance of 6-y-olds fol-
lowed similar patterns. From a c ognitive perspective, we may
speculate that second-order theory of mind abilities (e.g., dis-
cerning what others believe about my beliefs) (32), as well as
metalinguistic abilities (33), both of which are in place by that age,
play crucial roles in the transition from being able to learn a
language to being able to spontaneously create one. At the same
age children also grasp the coordinative function of conventions as
evident in their propensity to spontaneously create novel game
rules (34). However, the extensive work with homesigners suggests
that such complex systems might be created at even younger ages
(8–11). Because these systems are created over a longer period of
time, different cognitive processes might be at work. Studying the
direct link between cognitive abilities and the creation of struc-
tured communication systems will be a fruitful avenue for future
research.
Conclusion
We have documented in a controlled setting what might plau-
sibly be the incipient steps in the emergence of a new language-
like communicative system, which has allowed us to speculate
about the general dynamics of this process. Reference is
spontaneously established using iconic signs that are grounded
in the interlocutors ’ shared experience. Through reciprocal
imitation, signs and referents become linked in a conventional
way. The initially transparent re lations between iconic sign and
referent recede due to an effort to streamline expressions
(assuming knowledgeable partners), as well as a refinement of the
referential scope of a signal. Finally, grammatical structure comes
in a multitude of forms, emerging when more fine-grained dis-
tinctions are needed. Here, all of these processes occurred spon-
taneously in interactions of naive human children and in less than
30 min.
Materials and Methods
A version of SI Appendix is available at https://manuelbohn.github.io/ges3000/
ges3000.html.
Participants. All experiments were approved by an internal ethics committee
at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology (Leipzig, Germany).
All children (n = 198) came from an ethnically homogeneous, midsized German
city, were mostly monolingual, and had mixed socioeconomic backgrounds.
They were recruited from a database of children whose parents volunteered
to take part in studies of child development. Parents accompanying their
children were introduced to the procedure and gave informed consent on
behalf of their children.
Setup and Procedure. We established an audio-video connection between
television sets connecting 2 rooms in a child laboratory (Fig. 1). The direct
digital visual interface (DVI) connection between camera and TV made sure
that participants could interact in a smooth and contingent way. One of the
rooms served as a Production Room (PR) and the other as a Comprehension
Room (CR). Both rooms were located on the same hallway allowing exper-
imenters (E1 and E2) to coordinate easily when stepping out. In each room,
we installed a picture board. A picture was selected by placing a red arrow
next to it. Pictures were not visible for partners and varied across
experiments.
In each trial, E1 was with the child in PR [Production Child (PC)] and E2 with
the child in CR [Comprehension Child (CC)]. Trials in all experiments were
conducted as follows: E1 selected a picture in PR. On a visual signal from E1, both
experimenters said “ready, set, go” and left the room. The task of the child in
PR was to communicate the content of the selected picture to the child in CR.
26076 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1904871116 Bohn et al.
Downloaded at MPI f. evolutionäre Anthropologie on December 23, 2019 

PAGE 6
The child in CR made a choice by selecting a picture on her board. Children
received feedback about whether or not CC selected the correct picture.
All experiments started with a training phase in which the video as well as
the audio connection was still intact and children could talk to coordinate.
This familiarized children with the game. During training, each picture was
selected once. After the last training trial, children and experimenters left the
room and met in the hallway. One experimenter went into each room and
cut the audio connection. Children were told that they would play the same
game in a different way. Gestures were never mentioned as an alternative
means of communication. Next, children went into their respective room
again. In each test trial, children had 1 min to establish communication. If
they remained passive, E1 entered the PR and prompted PC to use iconic
gestures in 3 steps (see SI Appendix for details). Beyond the information
given in the main text, SI Appendix lists gives detailed information about
each experiment, including participant age, stimuli, procedure, number of
trials, analysis, coding, and reliability.
Analysis. All data and analysis scripts are available at https://github.com/
manuelbohn/ges3000. Analysis code is also included in SI Appendix . For all
analysis, we used R (35), and for models we used the functions glm and
glmer of the lme4 package (version 1.1 –17) (36). For mixed models, we used
a maximal random effect structure. P values for fixed effects are based on
likelihood ratio tests (37), which were computed via the function drop1.
Data and Materials Availability. Stimulus pictures, data files, and analysis
scripts are available at https://github.com/manuelbohn/ges3000.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Tünde Malomvölgyi, Anna Seidel, Tom
Hausmann, Anja Dreves, Claudia Salomo, Matthias Allritz, Ailis Cournane,
and Cristina Zickert. M.B. received funding from the European Union’sH o r i z o n
2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie
grant agreement no. 749229.
1. M. J. Kegl, A. Senghas, M. Coppola, “Creation through contact: Sign language
emergence and sign language change in Nicaragua ” in Language Creation and
Language Change: Creolization, Diachrony, and Development , M. DeGraff, Ed. (MIT
Press, Cambridge MA, 1999), pp. 179 –237.
2. A. Senghas, M. Coppola, Children creating language: How Nicaraguan sign language
acquired a spatial grammar. Psychol. Sci. 12, 323 –328 (2001).
3. D. Brentari, S. Goldin-Meadow, Language emergence. Annu. Rev. Linguist. 3, 363–388
(2017).
4. W. Sandler, I. Meir, C. Padden, M. Aronoff, The emergence of grammar: Systematic
structure in a new language. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 2661 –2665 (2005).
5. N. Fay, C. J. Lister, T. M. Ellison, S. Goldin-Meadow, Creating a communication system
from scratch: Gesture beats vocalization hands down. Front. Psychol. 5, 354 (2014).
6. M. Bohn, J. Call, M. Tomasello, Natural reference: A phylo- and ontogenetic per-
spective on the comprehension of iconic gestures and vocalizations. Dev. Sci. 22,
e12757 (2019).
7. M. Tomasello, Origins of Human Communication (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2010).
8. S. Goldin-Meadow, H. Feldman, The development of language-like communication
without a language model. Science 197, 401 –403 (1977).
9. D. Hunsicker, S. Goldin-Meadow, Hierarchical structure in a self-created communica-
tion system: Building nominal constituents in homesign. Language (Baltim) 88, 732 –
763 (2012).
10. S. Goldin-Meadow, The Resilience of Language: What Gesture Creation in Deaf
Children Can Tell Us about How All Children Learn Language (Psychology Press, New
York, 2005).
11. L. Rissman, S. Goldin-Meadow, The development of causal structure without a language
model. Lang. Learn. Dev. 13,2 8 6–299 (2017).
12. S. Goldin-Meadow, D. Brentari, M. Coppola, L. Horton, A. Senghas, Watching language
grow in the manual modality: Nominals, predicates, and handshapes. Cognition 136,
381–395 (2015).
13. A. Senghas, S. Kita, A. Ozyürek, Children creating core properties of language: Evidence
from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua. Science 305,1 7 7 9–1782 (2004).
14. J. L. Singleton, E. L. Newport, When learners surpass their models: The acquisition of
American Sign Language from inconsistent input. Cognit. Psychol. 49, 370–407 (2004).
15. S. Kirby, H. Cornish, K. Smith, Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An
experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 10681 –10686 (2008).
16. L. Raviv, I. Arnon, Systematicity, but not compositionality: Examining the emergence
of linguistic structure in children and adults using iterated learning. Cognition 181,
160–173 (2018).
17. S. Kirby, M. Tamariz, H. Cornish, K. Smith, Compression and communication in the
cultural evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition 141,8 7 –102 (2015).
18. Z. Clay, S. Pople, B. Hood, S. Kita, Young children make their gestural communication
systems more language-like: Segmentation and linearization of semantic elements in
motion events. Psychol. Sci. 25, 1518 –1525 (2014).
19. N. Frishberg, Arbitrariness and iconicity: Historical change in American sign language.
Language 51, 696 –719 (1975).
20. N. Fay, B. Walker, N. Swoboda, S. Garrod, How to create shared symbols. Cogn. Sci. 42
(suppl. 1), 241 –269 (2018).
21. S. C. Creel, Phonological similarity and mutual exclusivity: On-line recognition of
atypical pronunciations in 3 –5-year-olds. Dev. Sci. 15, 697 –713 (2012).
22. J. H. Greenberg, Language Universals: With Special Reference to Feature Hierarchies
(Walter de Gruyter, 2010).
23. E. Gibson et al ., A noisy-channel account of crosslinguistic word-order variation.
Psychol. Sci. 24, 1079 –1088 (2013).
24. S. Goldin-Meadow, W. C. So, A. Ozyürek, C. Mylander, The natural order of events:
How speakers of different languages represent events nonverbally. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 105, 9163 –9168 (2008).
25. A. Kocab, H. Lam, J. Snedeker, When cars hit trucks and girls hug boys: The effect of
animacy on word order in gestural language creation. Cogn. Sci. 42,9 1 8 –938
(2018).
26. V. Kempe, N. Gauvrit, D. Forsyth, Structure emerges faster during cultural transmission
in children than in adults. Cognition 136, 247–254 (2015).
27. N. Fay, T. M. Ellison, The cultural evolution of human communication systems in
different sized populations: Usability trumps learnability. PLoS One 8, e71781
(2013).
28. S. T. Piantadosi, H. Tily, E. Gibson, The communicative function of ambiguity in language.
Cognition 122, 280–291 (2012).
29. M. Bohn, B. Köymen, Common ground and development. Child Dev. Perspect. 12,
104–108 (2018).
30. H. H. Clark, Using Language (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996).
3
1. S. Goldin-Meadow, The impact of time on predicate forms in the manual mo-
dality: Signers, homesigners, and silent gesturers. Top. Cogn. Sci. 7,1 6 9 –184
(2015).
32. J. Perner, H. Wimmer, “John thinks that Mary thinks that ... ” attribution of second-
order beliefs by 5- to 10-year-old children. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 39, 437 –471 (1985).
33. B. Köymen, M. Tomasello, Children ’s meta-talk in their collaborative decision making
with peers. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 166, 549 –566 (2018).
34. S. Göckeritz, M. F. Schmidt, M. Tomasello, Young children ’s creation and transmission
of social norms. Cogn. Dev. 30,8 1 –95 (2014).
35. R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (Version 3.5.1,
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, 2017). https://www.R-project.org/.
36. D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, S. Walker, Fitting linear mixed-effects models using
lme4. J. Stat. Softw. 67,1 –48 (2015).
37. A. J. Dobson, A. Barnett, An Introduction to Generalized Linear Models (CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL 2008).
Bohn et al. PNAS | December 17, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 51 | 26077
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Downloaded at MPI f. evolutionäre Anthropologie on December 23, 2019 