PAGE 1
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Expectation violations signal goals in novel
human communication
Tatia Buidze 1 , Tobias Sommer 1,K eZ h a o2,3, Xiaolan Fu 2,3 &
Jan Gläscher 1
Communication, often grounded in shared expectations, faces challenges
when a Sender and Receiver lack a common linguistic background. Our study
explores how people instinctively turn to the fundamental principles of the
physical world to overcome such barriers. Speciﬁcally, through an experi-
mental game in which Senders convey messages via trajectories, we investi-
gate how they develop novel strategies without relying on common linguistic
cues. We build a computational model based on the principle of expectancy
violations and a set of common universal priors derived from movement
kinetics. The model replicates participant-designed messages with high
accuracy and shows how its core variable— surprise— predicts the Receiver’ s
physiological and neuronal responses inbrain areas processing expectation
violations. This work highlights the adaptability of human communication,
showing how surprise can be a powerful tool in forming new communicative
strategies without rely i n go nc o m m o nl a n g u a g e .
Effective communication relies on the ability of the Sender to design
messages that clearly convey intentions, and the ability of the Receiver
to accurately interpret these messages. In verbal communication, this
is achieved as speakers and listeners track the statistical properties of
language to optimize communication, often selecting the most pre-
dictable outcomes to facilitate understanding
1. The Rational Speech
Act model, for instance, posits that speakers optimize utterances to
minimize the listener ’ s surprise while maximizing the likelihood of
accurate interpretation by the listener
2. Similarly, the Information
Density Hypothesis suggests that speakers manipulate syntactic
structures to maintain a consistent ﬂow of information, by aligning
their linguistic choices with the statistical regularities of speech
3.
However, this predictability, seen in natural language processing,
is not always maintained in communication. In many instances, com-
munication takes on unconventional forms to achieve a speciﬁcg o a l .
For example, in signaling behavior where the Sender needs to strate-
gically direct the attention of the Receiver, it has been demonstrated
that inefﬁciencies can signal particular intentions
4, objects, even those
not intrinsically communicative like chairs or ropes, can convey social
meanings through their contextual arrangement
5, and non-verbal cues
can embody complex concepts like time 6.T h e s ee x a m p l e s ,w h i l e
diverse in communicative strategies, highlight a common theme: the
strategic deviation from expected communicative patterns to achieve
greater clarity and intentionality in communication. These deviations
are particularly effective because they contrast sharply with antici-
pated behaviors, thereby capturing attention and signaling intentions
more distinctly.
Here, we propose a uniﬁed framework of expectation violation as a
mechanism for the signaling function of human communication. This
approach entails two main mechanisms. First, when faced with situa-
tions lacking a common language, humans instinctively revert to more
basic, universal properties of the physical world (e.g., movement
direction or velocity) to form a shared understanding. It is not about
discovering new universal principles; rather, it is about repurposing
universally understood properties to build a new common commu-
nicative system through repeated social interactions. Second, once
these common grounds are established, they serve as the prior expec-
tations from which Senders can intentionally deviate. These deviations
are used to create surprise, which directs the Receiver ’ s attention to
essential information and transforms into communicative acts.
Received: 6 March 2024
Accepted: 7 February 2025
Check for updates
1Institute of Systems Neuroscience, University Medical Center Eppendorf, Hamburg University, Hamburg, Germany.2State Key Laboratory of Brain and
Cognitive Science, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.3University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
e-mail: tatiabuidze@gmail.com; glaescher@uke.de
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

PAGE 2
To substantiate this proposed framework, we developed a com-
putational model known as the Surprise model and tested its effec-
tiveness within the context of the Tacit Communication Game (TCG).
TCG is an experimental task designed to elicit novel communicative
messages through spatial trajectories on a square game board
7– 10.E a c h
player, known as the Sender and the Receiver, has distinct goals, but
only the Sender is aware of both positions. The Sender’ s objective is to
create a trajectory (the message) that begins at her starting point and
leads toward her goal location, while simultaneously indicating the
Receiver’ s goal location (see Fig. 1).
Given that TCG focuses on spatial movement and trajectories, in
the Surprise model, we developed two types of priors: one based on
movement kinetics, such as the expectation that a moving object will
continue its path unless acted upon by an external force
11,a n dt h e
other based on the Sender’ s goal orientation. These priors create the
core of a new common language, where trajectories along a straight
line signify a direction and embody a shared expectation. Deviations
from these paths thus transform into communicative acts. The Sur-
prise model utilizes these priors to construct messages that maximize
information-theoretic surprise, which quanti ﬁes the psychological
state of surprise at the Receiver ’ s goal state. By leveraging these
deviations from expected paths, communicative acts become signals
with meaning through social interactions.
Here, we show that the Surprise model, which uses expectation
violations as a core signaling mechanism, effectively replicates parti-
cipants’ behavioral data across two independent samples by generat-
ing messages that closely resemble those created by human Senders.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that model-derived step-by-step sur-
prise— resulting from intentional deviations from established priors—
signiﬁcantly inﬂuences both pupillary dila tion responses (PDR) and
EEG measurements in all Receivers. Speciﬁcally, the model’ ss u r p r i s e
values positively correlate with neural activity in fronto-central EEG
sensors above the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a brain region
typically associated with detecting expectation violations
12,13. Addi-
tionally, we observe a positive correlation between surprise values and
changes in pupillary dilation, which are typically linked to detecting
unexpected environmental changes
14– 16.T h e s eﬁndings indicate that
Receivers adeptly detect unexpected shifts in communication, as evi-
denced by their PDR and neural responses. Overall, our results support
the framework that expectation violations serve as a fundamental
mechanism for signaling in human communication, effectively linking
information-theoretic surprise to measurable physiological and neural
responses.
Results
We explored how humans form novel communication systems without
a shared language, and how deviations from expected patterns can be
used to convey information in the TCG. This game allowed us to esti-
mate the effectiveness of the Surprise Model in replicating human
behavior and the physiological and neural correlates of surprise during
non-verbal communication. Our goal was to demonstrate that humans
can use basic principles of movement kinetics to create new commu-
nication norms, and that these norms can be systematically studied
and modeled.
We ﬁrst provide a brief overview of the TCG. Next, we introduce
the computational models, followed by a model-free analysis of
behavioral data. Building upon this, we proceed to validate the com-
putational models and explore physiological observations related to
non-verbal communication within the TCG framework.
Experimental task
The TCG is a cooperative, two-player game where the Sender and
Receiver must establish non-verbal communication. In the game, the
Sender knows both players ’ destinations and creates a path (the
message) to guide the Receiver. The Receiver then uses this message to
ﬁnd his target location. The game unfolds overﬁve primary steps (see
Fig. 2a). Initially, the complete goal conﬁguration, including the start-
ing location, the Sender’ s goal, and the Receiver’ s goal, is fully visible to
the Sender but not to the Receiver. Speciﬁcally, the Sender has access
to all three elements of the conﬁguration, whereas the Receiver is only
presented with the starting location and the Sender’ s goal, leaving the
Receiver’ s own goal undisclosed. Next, the Sender moves her token
ReceiverSender
Surprise 
 model 
Low                  HighSurprise
Time
Surprise 
Time
Pupil size
Create
messages 
Calculate surprise
 signal 
Predict EEG data Predict PDR data
Fit model to Sender’s behavioral data
Time
Voltage
Fig. 1 | Overview of experimental procedure and analysis.This ﬁgure depicts an
experimental framework utilizing the Surprise model within the TCG. The experi-
ment begins by recording behavioral data from both Senders and Receivers as they
engage in TCG. This recorded data is then used toﬁt the Surprise model to estimate
the individual parameters. With these parameters, the model generates
communicative messages, each accompanied by message steps and their corre-
sponding surprise values. These values are subsequently analyzed to assess their
inﬂuence on the Receiver’ s physiological responses, speciﬁcally through EEG and
PDR measurements.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 2

PAGE 3
toward her destination while encoding the Receiver’ s goal location in
her movements, creating a‘ message’ to inform the Receiver of his goal.
Following this, both participants observe the trajectory created by
Sender. The Receiver then interprets this trajectory and moves his
token where he thinks his goal state is. A successful trial occurs when
the Receiver reaches the correct location, granting both players an
equal reward. The reward is quanti ﬁed as ten points reduced by the
number of steps the Sender used to transmit the message.
The TCG consists of two different types of goal con ﬁgurations:
‘ Direct’ and ‘ Indirect’ (Fig. 2c). Direct goal con ﬁgurations can be
communicated by the shortest path from the starting location to the
Sender’ s goal location, while indirect goal con ﬁgurations require a
deviation from the direct path. Direct Trials are inherently more difﬁ-
cult for the Receiver because his goal state does not stand out from the
direct path to the Sender’ s goal state. In contrast, when the Receiver’ s
goal is not on the direct path (i.e., an Indirect Trial) the Sender must
step sideways to enter the Receiver ’ s goal state. This difference also
prompts the creation of different Message Types (Fig.2b).
We collected behavioral data from two distinct samples (subse-
quently referred to as dataset 1 (D1) and dataset 2 (D2) consisting of 58
and 62 participants, respectively). Eye-tracking and EEG hyperscanning
data were exclusively obtained in D2 experiments. All pairs played 120
trials of the TCG. The two datasets differed in the proportion of direct
and indirect trials: D1 had 66% indirect and 34% direct trials, while D2
had 76% indirect and 24% direct trials.
Information-theoretic surprise as the communication signal
In this section, we provide a narrative overview of the Surprise model.
The mathematical details can be found in the “Methods” section. The
Surprise model consists of three distinct components: (i) the Move-
ment model, detailing the step-by-step priors over all available actions,
(ii) the State model, providing a prior guiding message creation toward
the Sender’ s goal, and (iii) the Reward, providing an orientation to the
Receiver’ s goal and an urgency toward shorter messages. We tested
the necessity of these components in a formal model comparison, in
which we compared degenerate versions (Movement and State mod-
els) against the full Surprise model.
The Movement model deﬁnes priors for all possible movements in
each state. These priors are based on a fundamental idea from
movement kinetics: without an external force, a moving object is
expected to continue its motion in the same direction where it came
from. Any deviation from this direction has a lower prior probability
and is therefore more surprising. This leads to the rule illustrated in
Fig. 3a, where p (forward) >p (left) =p (right) >p (backward). The cal-
culation of these subject-speciﬁc priors is governed by two estimable
parameters, γ— the probability of a backward movement, and λ,a n
odds-ratio parameter that describes the ratio of priors for forward
movement and leftward or rightward movement. Movement priors are
dynamic and can change with every step along the message path.
The State model de ﬁnes State priors, which provide a general
sense of the goal orientation for the Sender and decrease in concentric
Receiver
Sender Plans actions
Waits
Moves
Waits
Observes message
Observes message
Observes receiver
Moves
Feedback for both 
1. Presentation 2.  Sender’s Plan 3.  Observation 4.  Receiver’s Action
5.  Outcome
(a) Tacit Communication Game Trial
(b) Message types
Pass-by Enter-exit Wiggly
 Forward
Backward
Left and Right
(d) Message Profile(c ) Trial type
Direct trial Indirect trial
Fig. 2 | Trial steps and goal conﬁgurations in the modiﬁed TCG. a.1Presentation:
our version of TCG begins with players being presented with the relevant goal
conﬁguration. The presented goal conﬁguration for the Sender always includes
three elements: the starting location (orange circle), the Receiver’ s goal location
(blue cross), and the Sender’ s own goal location (orange cross). For the Receiver, it
comprises the starting location (blue circle) and the Sender’ s goal location (orange
circle). Both the Sender and the Receiver start at the same location on the grid.a.2
Sender’ s plan: the Sender designs a message by moving her token ﬁrst to the
Receiver’ s goal and eventually to her goal. a.3 Observation: the Receiver and the
Sender both examine the path crafted by the Sender. This step was incorporated to
facilitate the simultaneous recording of EEG data from both participants under
uniform visual stimulus conditions and to equalize the step length, preventing a
“pause” strategy to indicate the Receiver’ s goal location (see supplementary text
and Fig. S1 for more details).a.4 Receiver’ s action: the Receiver moves towards the
inferred goal. a.5 Outcome: success is displayed if the Receiver’ sc h o i c ei sc o r r e c t ,
indicated by a green checkmark. b Message types: three message types were cre-
ated by the participants. c Trial types: an illustration of two different trial types.
d Message proﬁle: an illustration of a message proﬁle featuring three character-
istics. The direction of movement is always deﬁned relative to the previous
movement. The initial movement originating from the starting location does not
have a predeﬁned direction. However, subsequent movements are oriented based
on the preceding movement.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 3

PAGE 4
circles from her goal according to an inverse power rule (Fig.3b). Thus,
moving along an increasing State prior will move the Sender straight
toward her goal. The State prior is static for the duration of the trial,
but changes with different goal conﬁgurations. Its shape is determined
by a single slope α parameter (see “Methods” for details).
In the Surprise model, the Sender selects the step-by-step actions
by intentionally violating expectations that are deﬁned by both types
of priors: Movement and State priors. This novel policy of action
s e l e c t i o nb ys u r p r i s el i e sa tt h ec o r eo ft h em o d e la n di st h eb a s i so fi t s
success in modeling message design in the TCG. The process of
creating a message involves two distinct phases: (i) in theﬁrst phase of
the message, Movement and State priors govern action selection from
the start location to the Receiver’ s goal state. (ii) In the second phase
of the message from the Receiver’ s goal state to the Sender’ sg o a ls t a t e ,
the Sender aims to reach her goal state as quickly as possible (Fig.3c).
Here, in the second phase, the principle of selecting a surprising action
is abandoned in favor of a policy that is solely governed by the
State prior.
Rewards for each potential next action are calculated as the dis-
counted cost (i.e., number of steps) to reach the Sender’ sg o a ls t a t ev i a
the shortest path through the Receiver’ s goal state. Rewards provide
an urgency to reach the Sender’ s goal quickly to retain the maximum
points from the initial endowment. The discount rate is estimated with
as i n g l ef r e ep a r a m e t e rε (see “Methods” for details). For example,
Fig. 3d showcases a scenario where the action of moving backward (B)
is linked to a greater reward due to its ability to reach goal locations via
the shortest path (depicted by the blue solid line), while other actions
(F, L, R) incur higher costs (indicated by a dashed line for action F).
The combination of the surprise from the Surprise model and the
rewards yields an expected value over all available next actions given a
speciﬁc planning horizon (see “Methods” for details). These expected
values are ﬁltered through a softmax function (parameterized with a
choice stochasticity parameter τ)t or e n d e rt h e ﬁnal action prob-
abilities for the next action.
Figure 3e– g illustrates the effect of each model component on
message planning in an intuitive way. Simulations with only the
Movement model (Fig. 3e, top) reveal that the Sender will perform
many zigzagging moves, because of the high surprise of the backward
action. In contrast, the pure State model (Fig. 3f, top) creates a direct
path message without surprising moves. The combination of both
models (Surprise model) (Fig.3g, top) generates messages comparable
to the human-created Enter-Exit messages. The second row illustrates
the effect of the different model components without the reward. The
pure Movement and State models (Fig.3e, f, bottom) generate similar
message patterns, but fail to communicate the Receiver ’ sg o a l .T h e
Surprise model (Fig.3g, bottom) generates 2-step wiggles, but without
the reward component, this model does not advance to the ﬁnal
Sender’
s goal ef ﬁciently. In Summary, by combining Movement and
State priors along with the surprise values and discounted future
rewards, the Sender can effectively communicate the Receiver’ s goal
Low                      HighProbability
b  State prior c  Planning phasesa  Movement Prior
P(F)
P(B)
P(L) P(R)
d  Reward
 F
 B
 L  R
Planning phase 1
Planning Phase 2
Computational Models of Message Creation
Messages simulated from:
f  State modele  Movement model           
With Reward Without Reward 
g  Surprise model                      
Fig. 3 | Computational models of message creation. a Movement prior assigns
the highest probability to forward movement, then left/right, and least to back-
ward. b State prior conveys the Sender ’ s goal by reducing probabilities at each
state with increased distance. c Planning phases: during Phase 1, the Sender
communicates the Receiver’ s goal; in Phase 2, the Sender proceeds to her own
goal. d Reward: Illustrates higher rewards for backward movements, facilitating
shorter paths to goals. e– g Model components: simulations with each model
component alone reveal that the Movement model (e) emphasizes the Receiver’ s
goal with surprising events, while the State model ( f) focuses solely on the ef ﬁ-
cient Sender’ s goal achievement. The Surprise model ( g) combines the ef ﬁ-
ciencies of the Sender ’ s goal achievement (State priors) with the emphasis on
signaling for the Receiver ’ s goals (Movement priors). Comparing messages with
reward information (ﬁrst row) to those without (second row) demonstrates that
incorporating reward minimizes cost and ef ﬁciently signals the Receiver ’ s goal.
These messages also match human messages most closely.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 4

PAGE 5
location. Once this objective is accomplished, the State priors then
guide the Sender towards taking the shortest path to reach her own
goal location.
Communicative strategies in TCG: a model-free analysis
Using our experimental data, we developed different indices to
describe the behavior of the Sender to gain a more detailed under-
standing of the cognitive processes involved in planning new com-
municative messages (For detailed results on dataset 1 (D1) and
dataset 2 (D2), see Figs.4aa n d5a, respectively). These indices are also
used in posterior predictive checks to test whether the ﬁtted model
can generate simulated data that closely resembles the observed
experimental data.
We identiﬁed three most common and distinct message types that
Senders used to communicate their intentions to Receivers. These
message types are illustrated in Fig. 2b( s e e “Methods” for details).
Enter-Exit message was predominantly used by participants (D1:
M = 63.82%, SE = 5.00%; D2: M = 54.95%, SE = 6.6%), and involves Sen-
ders momentarily diverging from the direct route to the Receiver ’ s
goal before proceeding to their own goal, noted for its high success
rates of 87% in D1 and 88% in D2. Wiggly message ranks as the second
most common (D1: M = 21.47%, SE = 4.67%; D2: M = 26.65%, SE = 5.91%),
and features Senders navigating on the direct path, shifting between
the Receiver ’ s goal and the next state to create a zigzag pattern,
achieving accuracy rates of 63% in D1 and 76% in D2. Pass-By message is
the least frequently employed but still notable (D1: M = 14.70%, SE =
3.66%; D2: M = 18.41%, SE = 4.95%). It involves Senders passing through
the Receiver’ s goal area on their way to their own goal and has the
lowest observed accuracy rates of 42% in D1 and 29% in D2. Individual
participant message proﬁles and strategy changes over the course of
the experiment are detailed in the Supplementary Material.
Our ﬁndings indicate that participants utilized all message types
in both trial contexts, but with different frequencies. Notably, during
the Direct Trial, there was a marked increase in the use of Wiggly and
Pass-By messages, suggesting a preference to remain on the direct
route during these trials. Conversely, in the Indirect trial, the most
used message type was the Enter-Exit message (see the second rows of
Figs. 4aa n d 5a for D1 and D2 results, respectively). A comprehensive
breakdown of these ﬁndings is provided in Supplementary
Tables S1b and S2b.
The message pro ﬁle details the number of movements in each
direction, relative to the last movement into the current state. For
instance, the Enter-Exit message pro ﬁle depicted in Fig. 2di n c l u d e s
movements Forward, Left, Right, and Backward. Each message type
exhibited a speciﬁcp r oﬁle. Enter-Exit messages are characterized by
frequent left/right movements, followed by forward and backward
movements. Wiggly messages have a higher frequency of backward
movements (due to the zigzag pattern), followed by left/right and then
forward movements. Pass-By messages differ from the other message
types by exclusively relying on left/right and forward movements,
  a   Participants   b  Surprise Model      c   State Model      d   Movement Model
 Message typesMessages by trial typeMessage profile
EE (Enter-Exit)
W (Wiggly)
PB (Pass-By)
Message types :
Forward
Backward
Left/Right
Message profile:
 Computational Models
EE W PB
0
20
40
60
80
100%
EE W PB
 EE W PB
 EE W PB
Indirect trial Direct trial
0
20
40
60
80
100%
Indirect trial Direct trial
 Indirect trial Direct trial
 Indirect trial Direct trial
EE W PB
0
10
20
30
40
50
60%
EE W PB
 EE W PB
 EE W PB
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EE W PB
e   Message Accuracy
Accuracy
Fig. 4 | Comparing participant-generated and model-simulated messages for
dataset 1. a Participants: participants’ behavioral data categorized by message
types, trial type, and message proﬁle. b Surprise model simulated data after model
ﬁtting exhibits similarity to participants’ data (Bayes factor analysis was used to
compare models. BF₀₁ > 1, indicating evidence for no difference).c State model and
d Movement model simulated data reveal differences from participant’ s data
(asterisks indicate BF₀₁ < 1, suggesting evidence against similarity).e Message
accuracy: accuracy as the Receiver’ ss u c c e s si nﬁnding his goal state. The Enter-Exit
message has the highest accuracy rate, followed by Wiggly and Pass-By messages.
All error bars represent means ± SEM. Sample size (n = 29) represents independent
biological replicates, with each data point corresponding to a unique participant.
Figure created using Matlab R2023a.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 5

PAGE 6
without incorporating any backward movement. Exact frequencies can
be found in the Supplementary Material (Table S1c for dataset 1 and
Table S2c for dataset 2).
In summary, this analysis highlights how Senders adapt their com-
munication strategies within the TCG, opting for different message types
depending on the trial type. The analysis highlights the cognitiveﬂex-
ibility required to navigate the game’ s constraints, revealing that different
strategies signiﬁcantly impact communication success. These insights
into message usage and effectiveness are crucial for understanding the
underlying cognitive processes and reﬁning cognitive models of non-
verbal communication that we will present in the next section.
Surprise model accurately explains Sender’s message design
To determine which model variant most accurately re ﬂects the
observed behavioral data, weﬁtted the free parameters for each model
by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the model for the col-
lected trial-by-trial data across subjects. The resulting model like-
lihoods, model frequencies
17, and protected exceedance probabilities
(PEP)18 are outlined in Table 1 for dataset 1 and Table 2 for dataset 2.
Here, log-likelihood serves as a cost function for model ﬁtting, with
higher values indicating a more precise ﬁt. Model frequency re ﬂects
the extent of a model ’ s suitability across different subjects, and PEP
evaluates the probability of a model being the most appropriate, while
also considering the potential that no model may ideally ﬁtt h ed a t a .
T h eS u r p r i s em o d e lﬁtted the observed data best. Its corre-
sponding model frequencies— 0.80 for Dataset 1 and 0.78 for Data-
set 2— suggest strong consistency in explaining the behavior across the
majority of participants. This is further substantiated by the PEP; High
PEP, close to 1 for both datasets, signals a strong statistical conﬁdence
that the Surprise model is the best model among the three variants
tested. This measure of conﬁdence also considers the null hypothesis
that no model in the model space is likely across the population. In
contrast, the Movement and State models alone exhibit signi ﬁcantly
lower PEP, which translates to a lower chance of these models being
the best- ﬁtting explanation for the datasets. This convergence of
likelihood, frequency, and PEP distinctly positions the Surprise model
as the most effective model for capturing the nuances of the observed
behavioral data.
The surprise model predicts participants’ behavior across
different samples
Next, our objective was to evaluate the ability of the Surprise model to
accurately replicate participant behaviors across different samples. We
ﬁtted the Surprise model to the initial sample using hierarchical
Bayesian estimation17 and used the estimated group parameter values
to simulate the message types and proﬁles for the observed sample. To
quantitatively assess the congrue nce between actual and predicted
frequencies, we employed Bayes factor analysis 19. The majority of
  a   Participants   b  Surprise Model      c   State Model      d   Movement Model
 Computational Models
EE W PB
0
20
40
60
80
100%
EE W PB
 EE W PB
 EE W PB
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
EE W PB
e   Message Accuracy
 Message types
Fig. 5 | Comparing participant-generated and model-simulated messages for
the dataset 2. a Participants: participants’ behavioral data categorized by Message
types, Messages elicited in different types of trials, and Message proﬁle. b Surprise
model simulated data after model ﬁtting exhibits similarity to participants' data
(Bayes factor analysis was used to compare models. BF₀₁ > 1, indicating evidence
for no difference). c State model and d Movement model simulated data reveal
differences from participant’ s data (asterisks indicate BF₀₁ <1 ,s u g g e s t i n ge v i d e n c e
against similarity).e Message accuracy: accuracy is calculated as the Receiver’ s
success inﬁnding his goal state. Enter-Exit messages have the highest accuracy rate,
followed by Wiggly and Pass-By messages. All error bars represent means ± SEM.
Sample size (n = 31) represents independent biological replicates, with each data
point corresponding to a unique participant. Theﬁgure was created using Matlab
R2023a.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 6

PAGE 7
Bayes factors obtained underscored a notable similarity across sam-
ples, as evidenced by BF₀₁ values ranging from 1.2 to 11.6 (for details,
see Table S3). This analysis demonstrates that the Surprise model is
not merely the most suitable ﬁt for the behavioral data, but also
emphasizes its capability to accurately mirror behaviors across varied
datasets.
Surprise model outperforms simpler model variants
Here we compare message generation by the Surprise model and its
degenerate versions (i.e., State, and Movement models) with the
messages generated by the participants. We employed a Bayesian
approach
19 to assess the support for two hypotheses: the null
hypothesis (H₀), which suggests no difference between the messages
generated by each model and the empirical data, and the alternative
hypothesis (H ₁), which posits substantial differences between the
model and the empirical data. We quanti ﬁed the strength of this evi-
dence for or against these hypotheses using a Bayes Factor (BF₀₁)f o r
each behavioral index. Deviations of the model generated from the
behavioral data (BF
01 < 1) are marked with asterisks above the model-
generated indices in Figs. 4 and 5 (for details, see Table S1 and S2).
When comparing the means of human-created message types
with those of the Surprise model, the resulting BF₀₁ (D1: BF₀₁ =1 0 . 2 0
(Enter-Exit), BF₀₁ = 6.48 (Wiggly), BF ₀₁ = 10.36 (Pass-By); D2: BF ₀₁ =
11.12 (Enter-Exit), BF ₀₁ = 10.95 (Wiggly), BF ₀₁ = 10.95 (Pass-By))
strongly support the null hypothesis that human-created message
types are similar to the ones generated by the Surprise model. We
conducted a similar analysis for message proﬁles, revealing moderate
to strong evidence supporting H₀. This is indicated by BF₀₁ values for
various pro ﬁle elements, ranging from 1.31 to 10.42 (details in
Tables S1c and S2c for D1 and D2, respectively). Theseﬁndings suggest
that messages generated by the Surprise model are largely similar to
human message pro ﬁles, though there are notable exceptions
regarding Wiggly and Pass-By messages in different trial contexts of
dataset D1. Unlike the Surprise model, comparisons between human-
created messages and those from the State and Movement models
favor the alternative hypothesis, showing that these models differ
from human-generated messages and do not accurately capture
human message generation. For more detailed information, please see
Table S2b.
In summary, formal model comparison demonstrated that the
Surprise model was most effective in capturing the nuances in parti-
cipants’ behavior. It showed high consistency across datasets and was
able to accurately replicate behaviors, emphasizing its robustness and
superiority over the simpler models in understanding non-verbal
communication strategies.
PDR correlates with model-derived surprise
Previous studies have demonstrated a close link between pupillary
dilation responses (PDR) and violations of expectations (i.e., a
surprise)
14. We therefore hypothesized that the step-by-step surprise
values calculated by the Surprise model would correlate signiﬁcantly
with the Receiver’ s PDR while observing the Sender’ sm e s s a g e s .T ot e s t
this, we devised a model-informed analysis, in which we used the step-
by-step surprise values from the Surprise model as a predictor for the
participant’ s step-by-step PDR and used a mixed-effects model as
implemented in the lmer package in R to test this correlation
20.I nt h e
model, we incorporated a ﬁxed effect for the task condition — ac o n -
tinuous variable representing surprise values. We also included ran-
dom intercepts and slopes for each participant. The mean PDR change
of message steps served as the predicted variable. The residuals of the
model met the assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity.
The results revealed that the baseline-corrected PDR (w.r.t. to a
pre-stimulus baseline of -200ms to onset) exhibited a signiﬁcant effect
for surprise (F (1,20) = 60.20),p < 0.001, eta = 0.75, 95% CI [0.55, 1.00],
two-tailed test). Speciﬁcally, the analysis demonstrated a signi ﬁcant
relationship between continuous s urprise values and PDR, as visua-
lized in Fig. 6a. The ﬁxed effect estimate for surprise (0.02) indicates
that for each unit increase in surprise, the baseline-corrected PDR
increases by approximately 0.02 units. This positive linear relationship
shows that greater surprises induce more pronounced physiological
responses, as measured by pupillary dilation.
In summary, we investigated how surprise, predicted by the Sur-
prise model, correlates with pupillary dilation responses (PDR). The
analysis shows a signiﬁcant correlation between surprise and PDR. This
Table 1 | Comparative evaluation of model performances for dataset 1: likelihoods, frequencies, PEP (protected exceedance
probabilities), and posterior group parameters
Model Log likelihood Model frequency PEP τελ γ α
Surprise model −60.06 0.80 1.00 6.93 0.39 0.10 2.14 1.84
State model −70.38 0.16 0.00 2.90 0.39 –– 1.11
Movement model −96.57 0.05 0.00 1.92 0.62 0.15 1.50 –
Model: refers to the three tested computational models: surprise, state, and movement models. Log likelihood: represents the log-transformed probability of the data given the model, where higher
values indicate a betterﬁt of the model to the observed data. Model frequency: reﬂects the proportion of subjects for which a given model is most likely the bestﬁt, with values closer to 1 indicating
higher generalizability across the sample population. PEP: is the probability that a model is more likely than any other model, while also considering the possibility that no single model is a goodﬁtf o r
the data population. Posterior group parameters (τ, ε, λ, γ, α): estimated group values for parameters:ε (discount rate for planning horizon),λ (backward movement),γ (forward and left/right
movement),α (slope of State prior), and τ (choice stochasticity).
Table 2 | Comparative evaluation of model performances for dataset 2: likelihoods, frequencies, PEP (protected exceedance
probabilities), and posterior group parameters
Model Log likelihood Model frequency PEP τε λ γ α
Surprise model −60.46 0.78 0.99 6.80 0.31 0.11 2.03 1.83
State model −69.48 0.22 0.00 2.77 0.45 –– 1.15
Movement model −94.26 0.00 0.00 2.50 0.70 0.15 1.98 –
Model: refers to the three tested computational models: Surprise, State, and Movement models. Log likelihood: this represents the log-transformedprobability of the data given the model, where
higher values indicate a betterﬁt of the model to the observed data. Model frequency: reﬂects the proportion of subjects for which a given model is most likely the bestﬁt, with values closer to 1
indicating higher generalizability across the sample population. PEP: is the probability that a model is more likely than any other model, while alsoconsidering the possibility that no single model is a
good ﬁt for the data population. Posterior group parameters (τ, ε, λ, γ, α): estimated group values for parameters:ε (discount rate for planning horizon),λ (backward movement),γ (forward and left/
right movement),α (slope of State prior), and τ (choice stochasticity).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 7

PAGE 8
suggests that surprise effectively triggers measurable physiological
responses, underscoring its impact in non-verbal communication
settings.
Neural encoding of surprise in TCG
We hypothesized that if Receivers identify their goal location based on
the deviation from their expectations, then we should observe a neu-
ronal encoding of surprise in brain regions associated with error
detection and conﬂict resolution
21,22.
We used the step-by-step surprise values from the Surprise model
again as a predictor for EEG power in a model-informed EEG analysis.
Speciﬁcally, we followed a trial-by-trial model-based approach
23– 26 in
which for each Receiver, we performed a regression at each electrode
and time point within 0– 1200 ms of each message step. Subsequently,
we analyzed the regression weights by testing them against 0 across
subjects for all electrodes and time points.
First, we identi ﬁed clusters of electrodes and time points that
showed signiﬁcant sensitivity to the predictor surprise irrespective of
message type, after correcting for the multiple comparisons (The
cluster formation threshold was set at p = 0.005 for t-tests)
27.S p e c iﬁ-
cally, we observed two distinct time-space clusters correlating sig-
niﬁcantly with surprise across electrodes and time. The ﬁrst cluster
displayed a positive effect at the frontal electrodes between 400 ms
and 800 ms of each message step. This cluster is visually depicted in
Fig. 7a, with yellow markers ( p < 0.05 cluster corrected). The second
cluster showed a positive effect at the frontal-central electrodes
between 800 ms and 1200 ms. This cluster is highlighted in Fig.7aw i t h
pink markers, also denoting signiﬁcance (p < 0.05 cluster corrected).
This analysis suggests that information-theoretic surprise is encoded
in the neural activity levels in the brain regions identi ﬁed by the sig-
niﬁcant clusters.
To further explore the neural origin of these sensor-levelﬁndings,
we conducted a source localization analysis using individual partici-
pants’ structural MRI images and electrode coordinates. The resulting
source activity indicated activation in regions close to the supple-
mentary motor area (SMA) and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(dACC), as shown in Fig. 7b.
We also observed that different message types (Enter-Exit, Wiggly,
and Pass-By) are associated with different levels of surprise. Is this
difference also reﬂected in the neural activity in these areas? To answer
this question, we repeated the above sensor-level analysis for each
message type separately. Initially, we computed the average of the EEG
data for each message type, followed by applying the same regression
analysis at every time point and electrode as previously described.
Subsequently, we examined the average regression weights from the
clusters identiﬁed as signi ﬁcant in the earlier analysis (frontal and
central clusters). The bar plots in Fig.7c next to the regression weight
time course show the average surprise levels associated with each
message type as calculated by the Surprise model. We observed that
message types characterized by high surprises, like Enter-Exit and
Wiggly, exhibited a stronger correlation with EEG signals from fronto-
central electrodes compared to less surprising messages such as
Pass-By.
In summary, an analysis of neural encoding of surprise in EEG data
unveiled two prominent time-space clusters over frontal and fronto-
central electrodes, potentially linked to surprise processing. High-
surprise message types, such as Enter-Exit and Wiggly, showed stron-
ger correlations with EEG signals from fronto-central electrodes
compared to less surprising messages like Pass-By, suggesting distinct
neural activity patterns linked to varying levels of surprise in com-
munication. Additionally, source localization analysis indicated acti-
vation in the SMA and dACC regions, suggesting these areas as the
neuronal origin of the observed sensor-level cluster.
Discussion
In this study, we explored the role of surprise as a communicative
signal in the absence of a shared language among participants by
employing the TCG as an experimental platform. The Surprise model
capitalizes on the information-theoretic surprise as the signal most
relevant for selecting the next possible action. A surprise can only
unfold based on prior expectations, which the model calculates by
integrating dynamic Movement priors, rooted in principles of move-
ment kinetics, and static State priors encoding the general goal
orientation. Additionally, a reward component pushes towards creat-
ing shorter, more ef ﬁcient messages that also pass through the
Receiver’ s goal. Model simulations (Fig. 3 e - g ) ,a sw e l la sm o d e lc o m -
parison with degenerate versions of the model (i.e., State model and
Movement model, Table1), revealed that each component is necessary
to generate messages similar to those created by human participants
in two independent data sets. The interplay of these model compo-
nents suggests that message planning in the TCG is a complex cogni-
tive operation, wherein human players intricately balance different
subgoals (represented by the mod el components) to communicate
efﬁciently.
a  Predicted PDR   b   Expected Surprise Levels during Observation
Surprise Levels:
Low
Medium
High
0
0.025
0.05
0.075
0.1
012 3 4
 PDR (baseline Corrected)
 Model-derived surprise values
Fig. 6 | Model-based analysis of PDR data. a Predicted PDR: the graph shows the
predicted baseline-corrected PDR as a function of model-derived surprise values.
The solid line represents the mean predicted PDR, while the shaded area indicates
the 95% conﬁdence interval around the mean. The relationship demonstrates a
signiﬁcant linear increase in PDR with increasing surprise values. b Surprise levels
during observation: as the message steps are observed by the Receiver, varying
levels of surprise associated with different steps are expected. Certain steps are
more surprising than others.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 8

PAGE 9
The key insight of this study is that a framework of expectation
violation can serve as a mechanism for signaling goal orientation in
human communication. Speci ﬁcally, when humans are confronted
with social situations in which they cannot rely on shared cultural,
linguistic, or even gestural cues, they revert to a more fundamental
level of physical laws that govern our environment and are universally
understood. These form the basis for commonly understood priors on
which a new communicative system can unfold through repeated
social interactions. Using this canvas of priors, humans can then
employ an equally fundamental mechanism— expectancy violations—
to communicate important information and guide Receivers ’
attention.
This approach contrasts with traditional communication models
that rely on predictability and shared linguistic cues
2,3. These are more
naturalistic scenarios where reliance on universal knowledge is unne-
cessary because the presence of shared language enables predict-
ability to serve as the primary driver of language comprehension. For
example, listeners and readers often use contextual information to
predict upcoming linguistic input
1, and predicting this input facilitates
a faster understanding of the message28. This predictability of a word in
the context of a sentence is described by quantities from information
theory, namely the KL divergence (or Shannon surprise)
29. This theo-
retical framework partially aligns with our Surprise model, which also
uses Shannon's surprise to create messages that are informative for the
Receiver in ﬁnding their goal, provided they can decode the surprise
by evaluating steps with respect to the priors, constructed from uni-
versal principles of movement kinetics. However, unlike traditional
models that focus on minimizing surprise to enhance comprehension,
our framework maximizes surprise. This approach is particularly cru-
cial in the absence of a shared language base, where maximizing sur-
prise helps convey information more effectively.
While predictability is the primary mechanism in classic commu-
nication models, there are situations where expectancy violations can
also play a crucial role in effective communication. For example,
classic work on implicature shows that being unnecessarily verbose
can convey additional meaning because the verbosity violates the
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Pass-by Enter-Exit Wiggly
0 400 8001200
time(ms) time(ms)
-0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
time(ms)
-0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Regression coefficient (a.u.)
Pass-By
-0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Enter-Exit
-0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Wiggly
-0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Regression coefficient (a.u.)
(a) Sensor-Level Clusters Sensitive to Surprise
Time (ms)
0 200  400                       600                     800                      1000                 1200    
         10100000                
               600               
0 20040060080010001200 0 20040060080010001200
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Regression coefficient 
Mean surprise 
Mean surprise 
Mean surprise 
Regression coefficient 
Regression coefficient 
0 400 8001200 0 400 8001200
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
(b) Source Localized Activation (c) Differences in Regression Coefficients Across Message Types
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
x106
Frontal View
Top View
-0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2Regression coefficient (a.u.)
Fig. 7 | Model-based analysis of EEG data. a Two distinct electrode clusters sen-
sitive to surprise: the ﬁrst cluster showed positive responses in frontal electrodes
(represented by yellow dots on the topoplot at 400– 800 ms), while the second
occurred in frontal-central electrodes (illustrated by pink dots on the topoplot at
800– 1200 ms). The time axis is the epoch of one message step during the obser-
vation phase of each message (see Fig.2a) which always lasts for 1200 ms.b Source
localized activation: source localization analysis revealed activation in the supple-
mentary motor area (SMA) and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) when
participants process surprising communicative signals.c Average regression
weights for different message types: regression weights were averaged over all
participants for each message type and across Central-frontal electrodes (gray
dots). Line plots display the mean regression coefﬁcients over time, with shaded
areas representing the standard error of the mean (SEM) around the mean. Bar
plots display the mean surprise per message type as calculated by the model. Error
bars on the bar plots represent means ± SEM. Message types such as Enter-Exit and
Wiggly, which have higher surprise values, correlate more strongly with EEG signals
from Central-frontal electrodes compared to less surprising types like Pass-By. The
sample size (n = 31) represents independent biological replicates, with each data
point corresponding to a unique participant. Thisﬁgure was generated in Matlab
R2023a using the FieldTrip toolbox
59, which is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 9

PAGE 10
expectation of conciseness30. Similarly, in prosody, unexpected varia-
tions in pitch, tone, or rhythm can enhance the emotional impact and
engagement of verbal communication
31. More recent research has
explored the adaptive bene ﬁts of expectancy violations. Repeated
exposure to syntactic anomalies, such as garden path sentences, helps
individuals adapt and process language more effectively over time 32.
Moreover, strategically introducing unexpected lexical or syntactic
complexity can also enhance the persuasive impact of messages,
demonstrating how deliberate expectancy violations improve com-
munication effectiveness, even in contexts requiring high levels of
clarity and engagement
33.
Similar principles have been observed in other referential com-
municative situations as well. Participants interpret communicative
actions through an expectation for ef ﬁcient communication, often
perceiving inef ﬁcient actions as intentional when they are
unexpected
4. This supports our observation that unexpected actions
in the TCG are often the most communicatively effective. Additionally,
research indicates that when interpreting color adjectives, people
prioritize context-speci ﬁc informativity over general world
knowledge
34.I ne x p e r i m e n t s ,p a r t i c i p a n t sw e r em o r el i k e l yt oc h o o s ea
less typical yellow object, such as a chair, over a more common one,
like a banana, when the color adjective played a crucial role in identi-
ﬁcation. This ﬁnding suggests that, in language processing, context-
speciﬁc expectations can override general assumptions based on
world knowledge.
Comparing these two mechanisms of communication— reducing
surprise through predictability and increasing surprise by deviating
from expectation— reveals that human communication fundamentally
involves managing expectations. While using surprise is more typical
in novel communication without a shared language, it can also be
employed in verbal communication. Introducing unexpected elements
in verbal interactions can enhance engagement, memorability, and
effectiveness. Examples include jokes, which rely on unexpected
punchlines to elicit laughter and engage the audience
35,a n dp r o s o d y ,
which uses variations in pitch, tone, and rhythm to maintain interest
and enhance comprehension
36. These two strategies of managing
expectations demonstrate the adaptability of human communication
across various contexts.
While our Surprise Model maximizes unexpectedness to enhance
communication without a shared language, traditional frameworks
including reinforcement learning
37, predictive coding and Bayesian
inference38, and active inference 39,40 handle surprise and prediction
errors differently. These models use prediction errors, deviations
between expectations and outcomes, as teaching signals to re ﬁne
future expectations, aiming to select actions that minimize these
errors for accurate prediction and long-term rewards. In contrast, our
study shows that in communication, Senders use surprise to disrupt
prior consistent perceptions and convey critical information. This
action selection by surprise contrasts with traditional action selection
by value, producing messages that mimic human design in scenarios
like the TCG. Thus, our model highlights a unique policy of maximizing
surprise, and adaptable based on task demands.
An alternative to expectation management in communication is
employing the Theory of Mind (ToM). ToM models form beliefs about
ap a r t n e r’ s behavior and choose actions accordingly
41– 43.I nt h eT C G
context, a ToM model requires de ﬁning a belief distribution over
possible states and exhaustively searching for each goal conﬁguration,
demanding extensive memory and contradicting the brain ’ s pre-
ference for efﬁciency. The Belief-based Model (BBM)44 is an example of
such a model that includes ToM-like mentalization, but it operates on
the entire message, thus precluding step-by-step analyses. We quali-
tatively compare the BBM to the Surprise model by simulating mes-
sage selection for all experimental goal conﬁgurations, but because of
the impossibility of calculating a subject-speciﬁc likelihood, the BBM
was not included in the formal model comparison. These simulated
messages from the BBM and a Bayes factor analysis showed that the
model fails to capture human message generation, suggesting ToM is
not the primary mechanism in TCG communication. Detailed infor-
mation about the BBM structure and simulation outcomes are avail-
able in the supplementary material.
We observed supporting evidence for the Surprise model in the
analysis of the physiological and neural data. Traditionally, variations
in pupil diameter have been indicators of arousal
45– 47 and cognitive
effort48. More recently, these changes have been reinterpreted to
provide insights into factors such as surprise, salience, decision biases,
and other dynamics that in ﬂuence information processing
14,49,50.A
signiﬁcant portion of these physiological responses can be attributed
to the activation of norepinephrine (NE)-containing neurons in the
locus coeruleus (LC) of the brainstem
51,52. In examining the Receivers’
physiological reactions while processing messages, we found a direct
correlation between PDRs and model-derived surprise signals. This
indicates that Senders, when intentionally communicating with sur-
prise, have a signiﬁcant impact on the physiological states of Receivers.
Sensor-level analysis of the neural encoding of surprise in the EEG
data revealed two prominent time -space clusters over frontal and
fronto-central electrodes. Sourc e localization analysis identi ﬁed a
dipole, the potential neuronal origin of these clusters, in the region
encompassing both th e Supplementary Motor Area (SMA) and the
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC). The ﬁrst cluster, appearing
around 400 ms after the onset of the communication step, may reﬂect
the Receiver mentally simulating the Sender’ s intended motor actions
while observing the message, potentially involving SMA activity, which is
typically engaged in motor planning
53. The second cluster, observed
later (800 ms after the onset), may be associated with the detection of
deviations from priors, involving the (dorsal) anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), a region known for error detection and the integration of diverse
information to guide decisions aligned with goals and reward
representations
12,13. The ACC is also thought to play a crucial role in
linking actions to outcomes and adjusting perceptions based on new
evidence54,55. Recent studies suggest its involvement in discerning oth-
ers’ intentions and detecting unexpected outcomes56,57.O u r ﬁndings
align with this perspective, and we interpret the second cluster as
potentially reﬂecting ACC activity related to the Receiver’ sp r o c e s s i n go f
surprise as intentionally designed by the Sender22. However, we recog-
nize that these interpretations remain exploratory, and further studies
are needed to conﬁrm the functional speciﬁcity of these ﬁndings.
The potential implications of these ﬁndings extend across multi-
ple domains, emphasizing the importance of harnessing expectancy
violations to improve communication in areas such as negotiation,
human-machine interfaces, and AI technologies. In negotiation, uti-
lizing strategic signaling and managing expectations can capture
attention and shift dynamics. Beyond negotiation, integrating ele-
ments of surprise into human-machine interfaces can make interac-
tions more engaging and intuitive. Unexpected yet relevant system
responses can capture user attention and enhance learning and
retention, leading to more user-friendly and effective interfaces. Inte-
grating this concept with AI technologies could potentially make AI
more human-like and creative. Generative AIs trained on extensive text
typically analyze sets of possible words based on contextual informa-
tion to ensure clarity and coherence by selecting the most probable
words. Even though these selection algorithms occasionally introduce
some variability through top-k sampling and temperature scaling, they
only ensure moderate variability in word selection. Applying the
principles of our Surprise model would lead to the selection of greatly
unexpected words, thus ensuring even greater variability in the
selection process. This adaptation would be an approach, that
potentially diverges from predictable paths to enhance creativity and
engagement. Such an application could enhance AI ’ s capabilities in
comedy, storytelling, or generative art, creating more engaging and
unique scenarios.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 10

PAGE 11
While communication through surprise is crucial in the TCG and
has broad implications, it is not the exclusive method for novel envir-
onments or general communication. The TCG provides a controlled
setting for studying non-verbal communication and expectation viola-
tions but does not fully capture the complexities of real-world com-
munication, which often involves a mix of verbal and non-verbal cues
and relies on social and emotional contexts. To increase the ecological
validity of these results in future research, we could start by translating
the game from the non-verbal to th e verbal domain. Another mod-
iﬁcation could involve allowing participants to choose between coop-
erative and competitive behaviors to explore different social contexts.
Finally, we could alter the game de sign to observe if the intention to
communicate can naturally emerge and how surprise plays a role in this
process. For instance, participants could learn to communicate while
playing the game without explicit instructions to do so.
In summary, the Surprise model demonstrates the effectiveness
of incorporating surprise in communication without a shared lan-
guage, a phenomenon explored through the TCG. Not only did the
Surprise model exhibit a notable alignment with human Sender
behaviors, but it also validates its impact through both physiological
and neural markers, af ﬁrming the crucial role of surprise in novel
communication.
Methods
Participants
This study complies with ethical regulations approved by the General
Medical Council of the City of Hamburg (PV7114). All participants
provided written informed consent prior to the study and were
ﬁnancially reimbursed for their participation. Each participant
received a base payment of 12 euros for every hour of participation in
the experiment. In addition to the base payment, participants were
eligible for a bonus (Mean bonus: 4 euros) based on their performance.
Dataset 1 involved 58 individuals (mean age: M = 25, SD = 4.4),
consisting of 29 pairs of Senders and Receivers, while dataset 2
included 62 participants (mean age: M = 26, SD = 4.1), comprising 31
pairs of Senders and Receivers. Study participants were recruited
through university job boards. The Exclusion criterion was a prior
history of neurological or psychiatric diseases. All the participants
were naive to the task and had been instructed with standardized
written instructions.
Experimental procedure
Prior to the experiment, the participants were placed in the same room
in front of separate screens to play the game after they had been
assigned roles and given detailed standardized instructions. Instruc-
tions informed them that success in the game depended on both
players reaching their respective goal locations. Speciﬁcally, the Sen-
der was aware of both players ’ destinations and needed to guide the
Receiver to his undisclosed goal location. Additionally, both players
were told each movement cost a score, and the bonus at the end of the
game would be calculated based on the sum of the scores from all the
trials. We clariﬁed that movement on the grid was restricted to hor-
izontal or vertical directions. Importantly, there were no practice
rounds offered, allowing us to observe the whole spectrum of behavior
from the moment participants were exposed to the game rules until
the end. The instructions deliberately avoided mentioning any speciﬁc
strategies like managing expectations or deviations, to prevent biasing
participants towards any predetermined strategies. Our goal was to
capture a wide range of natural communication behaviors as players
adapted to the game’ s requirements. The TCG game consisted of 120
trials. In every trial, players had to solve different goal con ﬁguration
problems. A goal con ﬁguration consists of three elements: (1) the
starting location in one of four middle states of the 4 × 4 game board
(same for both players), (2) the Sender ’ s goal location, and (3) the
Receiver’ sg o a ll o c a t i o n .
At the beginning of every trial, the Sender was presented with a
complete goal con ﬁguration, while the Receiver could only observe
the starting location and the Sender ’ sg o a ll o c a t i o n( F i g .2a). After
seeing the goal con ﬁguration and planning the message, the Sender
pressed a button to indicate that she was ready for movement. She
then had 5 s to move her token on the grid. Once the Sender had
reached her goal state, the entire message was shown to both players
with the same step duration of 1.2 s. After the message replay had
ﬁnished, the Receiver’ s token appeared at the starting location, and he
started moving after pushing the start button. Finally, both players
received feedback regarding their accuracy as a team.
To differentiate between different goal con ﬁgurations, we
focused on the location of the Receiver ’ s goal relative to the direct
path as the key trial characteristic. This characteristic was used to
deﬁne two distinct types of goal con ﬁguration, namely Direct, and
Indirect, as depicted in Fig. 2c. The goal con ﬁguration, where the
Receiver’ s goal location can be effectively conveyed by the shortest
path from the starting location to the Sender ’ sg o a ll o c a t i o n( D i r e c t
path) is referred to as the Direct con ﬁguration. Conversely, the goal
conﬁguration in which the Receiver’ s goal location can only be com-
municated by diverting from the Direct path is referred to as the
Indirect conﬁguration. In the experiment, Dataset 1 comprised 66% of
trials with a Direct Goal Con ﬁguration and 34% with an Indirect Goal
Conﬁguration. In contrast, Dataset 2 exhibited a 76% Direct Goal
Conﬁguration to 24% Indirect Goal Conﬁguration trial ratio.
Model-free behavioral indices
We deﬁned different indices to characterize the Sender’ sb e h a v i o ri na
more ﬁne-grained way, providing insights into the cognitive processes
behind creating new messages. These indices cover the message ’ s
general category (Message type) and its speciﬁc characteristics (Mes-
sage proﬁle).
We’ ve identi ﬁed three Sender-generated message types: Enter-
Exit, Wiggly, and Pass-By (as shown in Fig.2b). The Enter-Exit message
involves the Sender moving towards the goal and then reversing
direction, essentially entering, and then exiting the area near the goal.
The Wiggly message, while similar to Enter-Exit in its backward
movement, is distinguished by its multiple entries and exits, creating a
series of back-and-forth movements between two locations. In con-
trast, the Pass-By message is characterized by a straightforward
movement from the starting point to the goal, without any backward
or repeated movements.
The message proﬁle is a detailed characteristic of each message
and includes information on the number of movements in each
direction, speciﬁcally, forward, backward, left, and right. An example
proﬁle of the Enter-Exit message is shown in Fig.2d, which consists of 4
forward, 2 left and right, and 1 backward movement.
Analysis of pupillary responses
Data acquisition and preprocessing . Pupillary dilation data of the
Receiver were collected using the screen-mounted eye-tracker iView
Red-m (Sensorimotor Instrument (SMI), Teltow, Germany) with 120 Hz
sampling frequency, while the Receiver was observing the Sender ’ s
message (Fig. 2a), displayed on the screen with the resolution of
1920 × 1200 pixels. The eye-tracker was positioned 60 cm away from
the participant’ s face. A calibration was done before each game with
the iViewX software. To avoid pupil dilation caused by the sunlight, the
windows in the testing room were covered with blackout curtains with
a light-blocking effect. We used the same brightness and screen set-
tings for all the experiments.
To identify and remove the noise and invalid data segments from
the data, we followed the Guidelines recommended by Kret et al.
58
(https://github.com/ElioS-S/pupil-size) to prepare and ﬁlter raw data.
After identifying and interpolating invalid samples, we selected the
relevant 1.2 s epochs during the replay phase of the trial for further
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 11

PAGE 12
analysis. Pupillary dilation response (PDR) data were downsampled by a
factor of 10, thus rendering each step as a time series of 120 data points.
Mixed-model analysis for pupillary data. We investigated the effect
of surprise values generated by the Surprise model on the Receiver ’ s
PDR, using a mixed-model analysis implemented in the lme4 package
in R version 3.6.1, with the parameters estimated through maximum
likelihood estimation
20.
In the model, we included a ﬁxed effect for surprise values, and a
random intercept and slope for each participant:
PDR /C24 surprise +ð1 + surprisej subÞð 1Þ
To test the signiﬁcance of theﬁxed effects, we used the likelihood
ratio test (LRT) implemented in the lme4 package in R20.
EEG data analysis
Data preprocessing and cleaning . EEG signals were continuously
recorded from both players with a 128-channel Active 2 system from
BioSemi (Amsterdam, Netherlands) (0.1– 100 Hz band pass; 2048 sam-
pling rate). In the current study, we only analyzed the Receiver ’ s EEG
data during the replay section of a trial (Fig. 2a ) .W ed i v i d e dt h ec o n -
tinuous EEG time series into segments from 0 to 1200 ms based on the
onset of each message step. After visually inspecting the data, we
identiﬁe da n di n t e r p o l a t e da na v e r a g eo f6b a dc h a n n e l so u to f1 2 8
total channels. Additionally, we rejected an average of 40 bad epochs
out of 550 total epochs. Blinks were removed by using Independent
Component Analysis (average number of removed components: 5).
The electrodes were re-referenced to the average common reference
across the channels. These preprocessing steps were carried out using
the EEGLAB software version 2022.1.
Model-informed regression analysis . We used a model-informed
approach to analyze the EEG data
23– 26. The approach entails a linear
regression analysis of the EEG data of all steps of a message onto the
Surprise model-derived surprise values for each message step at all-
time points in the epoch and across all electrodes.
For this regression analysis, data were bandpass ﬁltered from
0.5 Hz to 40 Hz, and downsampled to 256 Hz. Baseline correction was
conducted by subtracting the mean activity between 0 and +100 after
movement onset because there was no gap between different move-
ment steps (and hence no time for the traditional pre-stimulus base-
line) and because inspection of the ERPs did not show any signiﬁcant
deﬂection in the ﬁrst 100 ms of each message step. We performed the
above-mentioned regression analysis for each participant at each
electrode and time point within 1200 ms epoch following movement
onset. The predictors were the model-derived surprise values
(described below) for each message step and a trial-speciﬁc intercept.
This procedure creates a time series of regression coefﬁcients, which
were averaged across trials and then tested against 0 across partici-
pants to determine the time point at which the model-derived surprise
signiﬁcantly predicted the epoched EEG data.
The multiple comparison problem was addressed by using a
cluster-based permutation test, as implemented in the ﬁeld trip soft-
ware package
59. The cluster formation threshold was set at a sig-
niﬁcance level of p =0 . 0 0 5f o rt h et-test.
Neural source localization analysis. The neural sources associated
with the observed EEG signals were identiﬁed through a source loca-
lization analysis, which involved several key steps:
(1) MRI acquisition and preprocessing: high-resolution T1-weighted
structural MRI images were obtained for each participant (3D MPRAGE
sequence, TR 2300 ms, TE 2.89 ms, ﬂip angle 9°, 1-mm slices, ﬁeld of
view 256 × 192; 240 slices). Alignment of the MRI coordinate system to
the CTF coordinate system facilita ted accurate integration with EEG
electrode coordinates. Coregistration of MRI images with EEG electrode
positions was performed interactively, ensuring anatomical information
from the MRI matched the spatial conﬁguration of the EEG sensors. The
MRI images were resliced for consistent orientation and voxel size,
improving accuracy in segmentation and source localization.
(2) Segmentation and head model creation: automated algo-
rithms segmented the MRI images into brain, skull, and scalp tissues,
providing necessary anatomical details for constructing head models
(part of the ﬁeld trip package). A boundary element model (BEM) was
created from the segmented tissues, accurately representing the
conductive properties of each participant’ s head. EEG electrode posi-
tions that were generated from 3D images recorded from each parti-
cipant’ s head while still wearing the EEG caps were aligned to the scalp
mesh through interactive procedures, ensuring accurate correspon-
dence between electrode positions and anatomical structures.
(3) Source reconstruction analysis: the lead ﬁeld matrix was cal-
culated using the head model and aligned electrode positions,
describing how each potential source contributes to the observed EEG
signals. Time-locked analysis of the Receiver’ s EEG data for speci ﬁed
time windows generated averaged data representing neural activity
during each message step. Source analysis was conducted using line-
arly constrained minimum variance (LCMV) beamforming, which
computes neural sources by maximizing signal from a given location
while minimizing contributions from other locations. Source data for
each participant were averaged to create a grand average source
activation map, representing common neural sources across all parti-
cipants. The grand average source data were normalized to MNI
standard space and interpolated onto MRI images, allowing visualiza-
tion of neural sources in a standardized anatomical space.
Surprise model
The core concept behind the Surprise model for the TCG is to com-
municate the Receiver ’ s goal location by defying the expectations
enforced by probabilistic priors about the next likely step and the
general direction of the Sender ’ s goal location. Violating these
expectations communicates to the Receiver that he must pay attention
to this part of the message. The model quanti ﬁes these expectation
violations by calculating the information-theoretic surprise for each
available action and then selecting the action with the highest surprise.
Thus, a critical part of the model is the de ﬁnition of the prior prob-
abilities. The model incorporates two types of priors — movement
priors and State priors.
Movement priors. The Movement model assigns probabilities to all
available actions, based on the concept of movement kinetics, that an
object in motion without an external force is likely to continue moving in
a straight line. Deviations from this trajectory are less likely and, there-
fore, more surprising. This notion implies a dynamic realignment of the
Movement priors after each step. For instance, if the model takes a turn,
the action probabilities will shift towards the new straight direction.
Generally, the movement probabilities follow the ranking order of
pðf Þ > pðlÞ = pðrÞ > pðbÞð 2Þ
where pðf Þ is the probability of going forward,pðlÞ is the probability of
going left, pðrÞ is the probability of going right, and pðbÞ is the prob-
ability of going backward. These four probabilities are parameterized
using two estimable parameters, namely,λ and γ. They are expressed in
the model as follows:
λ = pðbÞð 3Þ
γ =
pð f Þ
pð l Þ + pð r Þ ð4Þ
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 12

PAGE 13
λ is restricted to be small (e.g., 0.001– 0.3), whereasγ is restricted
to a range between 2 – 10. For instance, if γ =2 , t h e npðf Þ is twice as
likely as the combined probability of a turn ( pðlÞ + pðrÞ) and hence,
pfðÞ =2 =3a n d pðlÞ = pðrÞ =1 =6.
More generally, the individual probabilities for all four move-
ments can be calculated from these two parameters in the following
way:
pðbÞ = λ ð5Þ
pðf Þ =
γ
γ +1 ð1 /C0 λÞ ð6Þ
pðlÞ = pðrÞ =0 :5
/C16
1 /C0 γ
γ +1
/C17
ð1 /C0 λÞ ð7Þ
Note that the Movement priors remain constant for all steps in all
trials, but the orientation (forward, left, right, backward) changes with
every step the player takes.
State priors
State priors play a crucial role in providing a general sense of the
Sender’ sg o a lo rd e s t i n a t i o n .S p e c iﬁcally, the prior state probability is a
function that has a value of 1 at the Sender ’ sg o a la n dt h e nd e c r e a s e s
according to an inverse power rule as the distance from the goal
increases. The function is deﬁned as
pðsÞ =
1
α d ð8Þ
Where pðsÞ is the probability of a state being at a distance d from the
Sender’ sg o a ll o c a t i o n .α is the positive estimable slope parameter,
determining the rate at which probabilities decrease with increasing
distance from the Sender’ s goal. It remains constant for all trials, but
the location of the peak of the State prior changes with every goal
conﬁguration.
Combined movement-state priors and surprise
To render the ﬁnal probabilities for each action (p(a)), movement and
State priors are multiplicatively combined and normalized as follows.
pðajsÞ = pðmÞpðs0js, mÞ
P4
m =1 pðmÞpðs0js, m Þ ð9Þ
Where probability p(m) is one of the movement probabilities out of
four possible movements (f, l, r, b ), while pðs0js, m Þ is the State prior
probability of states0 after movementm.N o t et h a tt h i si sn o tas o f t m a x
ﬁltering, but rather a normalization to ensure valid probability values.
The information-theoretic (Shannon) surprise of each action is
then calculated as:
hðajsÞ = /C0 log 2 pa jsðÞðÞ ð 10Þ
Where hðajsÞ is a measure of information-theoretic surprise and shows,
how much action a in the state s deviates from what the Receiver
expected the Sender to do based on the combined movement and
State priors. In contrast to other models of learning and decision-
making (like Reinforcement Learning), the Surprise model uses the
Shannon surprise for the calculation of the ﬁnal action probabilities.
Rewards
If the actions were only selected based on the Shannon surprise, then
the ﬁnal message trajectory would meander around the game board
without ef ﬁciently reaching the Sender ’ s goal (see simulations in
Fig. 3e– g). The rewards (conceptualized as the cost per step in the
TCG) provide the Sender with an urge to reach his goal quickly and
retain the maximum possible point from the initial endowment. Thus,
i nt h em o d e l ,w ed eﬁned the rewardsrðs
0ja, sÞ at the next states0 that is
reached by choosing action a in state s, as the number of points that
would remain from the initial ten points after taking the shortest route
thereafter through the Receiver ’ sg o a lt ot h eS e n d e r’ sg o a l .T h e s e
rewards are multiplicatively combined with the Shannon surprise cal-
culated above into an expected value:
evðajsÞ = hðajsÞ × rðs
0ja, sÞð 11Þ
Two phases of message planning
Designing a message in the TCG has two components: (1) creating a
trajectory to the Receiver ’ s goal that informs the Receiver of the
location. The Surprise model realizes this by using the deviations from
prior expectations (Shannon surprise), and (2) afterward moving to the
Sender’ s goal on the shortest route to retain the maximum possible
amount from the initial endowment. Thus, the second planning phase
no longer uses the Shannon surprise of the combined Movement-State
prior for action selection, but simply moves along the direction of the
State prior toward the Sender’ s goal. The expected value for this sec-
ond planning phase is then:
evðajsÞ = pðs
0ja, sÞ × rðs0ja, sÞð 12Þ
Planning a message in steps
In the context of a decision-making problem like a TCG, an agent can
use value iteration60 to plan its next moves up to a certain point in the
future (a planning horizon). The planning horizon determines the
number of steps the agent plans. For example, if the planning horizon
is 2, the agent will plan its actions from the current step until 2 steps
into the future. The purpose of this planning horizon is to determine
the optimal course of action that maximizes the agent ’ ss u mo f
expected future rewards.
In the Surprise model, this is done by generating a tree of possible
actions and calculating the expected values of each possible action at
each step of the planning horizon, while considering the potential
future rewards that might come after. The expected value of getting to
the next state in the policy tree from the current states
i using actionai
is the following:
evai sij = hðai si
/C12/C12 Þ × ϵirðs0
i si
/C12/C12 , aiÞ ð13Þ
where hðai si
/C12/C12 Þ is the surprise associated with the action probability of
getting to the next stage in the policy tree from the current statesi using
action ai and ϵi is the discount factor at the planning step i,a n d
rðs0
i si
/C12/C12 , aiÞ is the reward available in the next states0 that is reached from
the current state s via action a in the planning step i. Once the model
calculates the expected values for every state-action pair on the tree, it
then sums up the expected values alongeach trajectory in the policy tree
to render theﬁnal expected values for all immediately available actions:
EV ðasj Þ =
X
evai sij ð14Þ
These expected values are then ﬁltered through a softmax func-
tion to render the ﬁnal action probabilities:
Pr a sjðÞ = eτEV ðasj Þ
P
aeτEðasj Þ ð15Þ
The softmax function is used to calculate the probability of taking
a particular action a in a given state s, based on the expected future
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 13

PAGE 14
rewards associated with each action with an estimable temperature
parameter τ that models the stochasticity of the choice.
Parameter estimation
We used the Computational and Behavioral Modeling (CBM) toolbox
(version 3, MATLAB R2021) 17, which uses a hierarchical variational
Bayes approach to estimate the parameters of the Surprise model for
each participant. The model is deﬁned by ﬁve key parameters, repre-
sented as λ, γ, a, ϵ and τ, which are detailed in Eqs. 3, 4, 8, 13,a n d 15,
respectively. Our approach involved utilizing the Laplace approxima-
tion method, implemented in the toolbox, to effectivelyﬁt the model
to our behavioral data.
Statistical analysis of posterior predictive checks
One of the objectives of our study was to identify the computational
account that most closely replicates the behavior of the human Sender
in a posterior predictive check. We simulated new synthetic data using
the ﬁt t e dm o d e lp a r a m e t e r sa n dc a l c u l a t e dt h em o d e l - f r e eb e h a v i o r a l
indices that were deﬁned for the behavioral data (message frequency
and message proﬁle). We employed a Bayesian approach
19 to compare
the null hypothesis (H₀: no differences between model-generated data
and human experimental data) with the alternative hypothesis (H ₁:
substantial differences between model-generated and human experi-
mental data) for all three model variations. A Bayesian approach allows
for a quantiﬁcation of evidence for both hypotheses.
To evaluate the evidence for H₀ vs H₁ for all models, we computed
several Bayes factors (BF₀₁) by comparing the means of the behavioral
indices discussed earlier with the means of the corresponding indices
generated by the computational models.
AB F₀₁ of less than 1 favors the alternative hypothesis (H₁)o v e rt h e
null hypothesis (H₀), indicating that the data provides more evidence
supporting the noticeable discrepancy between the model and human
Sender behavior. Conversely, a BF ₀₁ greater than 1 favors the null
hypothesis (H₀) over the alternative hypothesis (H ₁), indicating that
the model can closely replicate the behavior of human Senders.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All behavioral and physiological data necessary to run the analysis are
publicly available at: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14333555.T h e
EEG data is available at: https://doi.org/10.12751/g-node.5bns43.
Code availability
The code to run the analysis and reproduce theﬁg u r e si sa r c h i v e da n d
publicly available athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14333555.T h er e p o -
sitory includes a READMEﬁle with detailed instructions on how to set up
the environment, install necessary dependencies, and execute the code.
References
1. Ryskin, R. & Nieuwland, M. S. Prediction during language compre-
hension: What is next? Trends Cogn. Sci. 27,1 0 3 2–1052 (2023).
2. Goodman, N. D. & Frank, M. C. Pragmatic language interpretation as
probabilistic inference.Trends Cogn. Sci. 20,8 1 8–829 (2016).
3. Levy, R. & Jaeger, T. Speakers optimize information density through
syntactic reduction.Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. https://doi.org/
10.7551/mitpress/7503.003.0111(2006).
4. Royka, A., Chen, A., Aboody, R., Huanca, T. & Jara-Ettinger, J. People
infer communicative action through an expectation for efﬁcient
communication.Nat. Commun. 13, 4160 (2022).
5 . L o p e z - B r a u ,M .&J a r a - E t t i n g e r ,J .P e o p l ec a nu s et h ep l a c e m e n to f
objects to infer communicative goals.Cognition 239,
105524 (2023).
6. Verhoef, T., Walker, E. & Marghetis, T. Interaction dynamics affect
the emergence of compositional structure in cultural transmission
of space-time mappings.P r o c .A n n .M e e t .C o g n .S c i .S o c .44,
2133–2139 (2022).
7. Ruiter, J. P. D. et al. Exploring the cognitive infrastructure of com-
munication.Interact. Stud. 11,5 1–77 (2010).
8. Haggard, P. et al. On the origin of intentions . In Sensorimotor
Foundations of Higher Cognition601–618 (Oxford University Press,
2012); https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199231447.
003.0026.
9. Blokpoel, M. et al. Recipient design in human communication:
Simple heuristics or perspective taking?.Front. Hum. Neurosci.6,
253 (2012).
10. Willems, R. M., Benn, Y., Hagoort, P., Toni, I. & Varley, R. Commu-
nicating without a functioning language system: implications for
the role of language in mentalizing. Neuropsychologia49,
3130–3135 (2011).
1 1 . S t e p h e n s ,R .C .&W a r d ,J .J .M o t i o ni nac i r c l e .I nApplied Mechanics
(eds. Stephens, R. C. & Ward, J. J.) 27–39 (Macmillan Education UK,
London, 1972); https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-00870-4_3.
12. Kolling, N., Behrens, T., Wittmann, M. K. & Rushworth, M. Multiple
signals in anterior cingulate cortex.Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.37,
36–43 (2016).
13. Kennerley, S. W., Walton, M. E., Behrens, T. E. J., Buckley, M. J. &
Rushworth, M. F. S. Optimal decision making and the anterior cin-
gulate cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 940–947 (2006).
14. Preuschoff, K., Hart, B. M. & Ei nhäuser, W. Pupil dilation signals
surprise: evidence for Noradrenaline’s role in decision making.
Front. Neurosci.5, 115 (2011).
15. de Gee, J. W., Correa, C. M. C., Weaver, M., Donner, T. H. & van Gaal,
S. Pupil dilation and the slow wave ERP reﬂect surprise about choice
outcome resulting from intrinsic variability in decision conﬁdence.
Cereb. Cortex 31,3 5 6 5–3578 (2021).
16. Sara, S. J. & Bouret, S. Orienting and reorienting: the locus coer-
uleus mediates cognition through arousal.Neuron 76,
130–141 (2012).
1 7 . P i r a y ,P . ,D e z f o u l i ,A . ,H e s k e s ,T . ,F r a n k ,M .J .&D a w ,N .D .H i e r -
archical Bayesian inference for concurrent model ﬁtting and com-
parison for group studies.PLoS Comput. Biol.15, e1007043 (2019).
1 8 . S t e p h a n ,K .E . ,P e n n y ,W .D . ,D a u n i z e a u ,J . ,M o r a n ,R .J .&F r i s t o n ,K .J .
Bayesian model selection for group studies.Neuroimage46,
1004–1017 (2009).
19. Hoijtink, H., Mulder, J., van Lissa, C. & Gu, X. A tutorial on testing
hypotheses using the Bayes factor.Psychol. Methods24,
539–556 (2019).
20. Luke, S. G. Evaluating signiﬁcance in linear mixed-effects models in
R. Behav. Res. Methods 49,1 4 9 4–1502 (2017).
2 1 . B o t v i n i c k ,M .M . ,B r a v e r ,T .S . ,B a r c h ,D .M . ,C a r t e r ,C .S .&C o h e n ,J .
D. Conﬂict monitoring and cognitive control.Psychol. Rev. https://
doi.org/10.1037//0033-295X.I08.3.624(2001).
22. Holroyd, C. B. & Coles, M. G. H. The neural basis of human error
processing: reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the error-
related negativity.Psychol. Rev. 109,6 7 9–709 (2002).
23. Collins, A. G. E. & Frank, M. J. Neural signature of hierarchically
structured expectations predicts clustering and transfer of rule sets
in reinforcement learning.Cognition 152,1 6 0–169 (2016).
24. Fischer, A. G., Nigbur, R., Klein, T. A., Danielmeier, C. & Ullsperger,
M. Cortical beta power reﬂects decision dynamics and uncovers
multiple facets of post-error adaptation.Nat. Commun. 9,
5038 (2018).
25. Cavanagh, J. F. Cortical delta activity re ﬂects reward prediction
error and related behavioral adjustments, but at different times.
Neuroimage110
,2 0 5–216 (2015).
26. Larsen, T. & O ’Doherty, J. P. Uncovering the spatio-temporal
dynamics of value-based decision-making in the human brain: a
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 14

PAGE 15
combined fMRI-EEG study.P h i l o s .T r a n s .R .S o c .L o n d .BB i o l .S c i.
369,2 0 1 3 0 4 7 3( 2 0 1 4 ) .
2 7 . M a r i s ,E .&O o s t e n v e l d ,R .N o n p a r a metric statistical testing of EEG-
and MEG-data. J. Neurosci. Methods 164,1 7 7–190 (2007).
28. Shain, C., Meister, C., Pimentel, T., Cotterell, R. & Levy, R. Large-
scale evidence for logarithmic effects of word predictability on
reading time. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 121, e2307876121 (2024).
29. Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. SIGMO-
BILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 5,3 –55 (2001).
30. Horn, L. R. Implicature. in The Handbook of Pragmatics2–28
(Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Oxford, 2008);https://doi.org/10.1002/
9780470756959.ch1
31. Dahan, D. Prosody and language comprehension. Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev. Cogn. Sci. 6,4 4 1–452 (2015).
32. Fine, A. B., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T. A. & Qian, T. Rapid expectation
adaptation during syntactic comprehension.PLoS One 8,
e77661 (2013).
3 3 . A v e r b e c k ,J .M .&M i l l e r ,C .E x p a n d i n gl a n g u a g ee x p e c t a n c yt h e o r y :
the suasory effects of lexical complexity and syntactic complexity
on effective message design.Commun. Stud. 65,7 2–95 (2014).
34. Rohde, H. & Rubio-Fernandez, P. Color interpretation is guided by
informativity expectations, not by world knowledge about colors.J.
Mem. Lang. 127, 104371 (2022).
35. Shaw, J. Philosophy of humor. Philos. Compass 5,1 1 2–126 (2010).
36. Kurumada, C., Brown, M., Bibyk, S., Pontillo, D. F. & Tanenhaus, M. K.
Is it or isn’t it: listeners make rapid use of prosody to infer speaker
meanings. Cognition 133,3 3 5–342 (2014).
37. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning, Second Edition:
An Introduction (MIT Press, 2018).
38. Aitchison, L. & Lengyel, M. With or without you: predictive coding
and Bayesian inference in the brain. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.46,
219–227 (2017).
39. Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. Working memory, attention, and salience in
active inference.Sci. Rep. 7, 14678 (2017).
40. Friston, K. et al. Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 68,8 6 2–879 (2016).
41. Baker, C. L., Jara-Ettinger, J., Saxe, R. & Tenenbaum, J. B. Rational
quantitative attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in human
mentalizing.Nature Human Behaviour1,1 –10 (2017).
42. Yuan, L., Fu, Z., Zhou, L., Yang, K. & Zhu, S. C. Emergence of theory
of mind collaboration in multiagent systems. Preprint athttps://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.00121(2019).
4 3 . D eW e e r d ,H . ,V e r b r u g g e ,R .&V e r h e i j ,B .H o wm u c hd o e si th e l pt o
know what she knows you know? An agent-based simulation study.
Artif. Intell. 199–200,6 7–92 (2013).
44. de Weerd, H., Verbrugge, R. & Verheij, B. Higher-order theory of
mind in the Tacit communication game.Biol. Inspir. Cogn. Archit.11,
10–21 (2015).
4 5 . B r a u n ,A . ,U r a i ,A .E .&D o n n e r ,T .H .P u p i l - l i n k e da r o u s a li sd r i v e nb y
decision uncertainty and alters serial choice bias.Nat. Commun. 8,
1–11 (2017).
46. van Kempen, J. et al. Behavioural and neural signatures of percep-
tual decision-making are modulated by pupil-linked arousal.Elife.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.42541(2019).
47. Bradley, M. M., Miccoli, L., Escrig, M. A. & Lang, P. J. The pupil as a
measure of emotional arousal and autonomic activation.Psycho-
physiology45,6 0 2–607 (2008).
48. Foroughi, C. K., Sibley, C. & Coyne, J. T. Pupil size as a measure of
within-task learning.Psychophysiology54,1 4 3 6–1443 (2017).
4 9 . H o e k s ,B .&L e v e l t ,W .J .M .P u p i l l a r yd i l a t i o na sam e a s u r eo f
attention: a quantitative system analysis.Behav. Res. Methods
Instrum. Comput.25,1 6–26 (1993).
50. Yebra, M. et al. Action boosts episodic memory encoding in humans
via engagement of a noradrenergic system.bioRxiv 30,
71–42 (2017).
51. Joshi, S., Li, Y., Kalwani, R. M. & Gold, J. I. Relationships between
pupil diameter and neuronal activity in the locus coeruleus, colli-
culi, and cingulate cortex.Neuron 89, 221–234 (2016).
52. Larsen, R. S. & Waters, J. Neuromodulatory correlates of pupil
dilation. Front. Neural Circuits12,2 1( 2 0 1 8 ) .
5 3 . N a c h e v ,P . ,K e n n a r d ,C .&H u s a i n ,M .F u n c t i o n a lr o l eo ft h es u p -
plementary and pre-supplementary motor areas.Nat. Rev. Neu-
rosci. 9,8 5 6–869 (2008).
5 4 . R u s h w o r t h ,M .F .S . ,K o l l i n g ,N . ,S a l l e t ,J .&M a r s ,R .B .V a l u a t i o na n d
decision-making in frontal cortex: One or many serial or parallel
systems? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.22
, 946–955 (2012).
55. Rushworth, M. F. S., Walton, M. E., Kennerley, S. W. & Bannerman, D.
M. Action sets and decisions in the medial frontal cortex. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 8,4 1 0–417 (2004).
5 6 . A p p s ,M .A .J . ,R u s h w o r t h ,M .F .S .&C h a n g ,S .W .C .T h ea n t e r i o r
cingulate gyrus and social cognition: tracking the motivation of
others. Neuron 90,6 9 2–707 (2016).
57. Zhang, L. & Gläscher, J. A brain network supporting social in ﬂu-
ences in human decision-making.Sci. Adv. 6, eabb4159 (2020).
5 8 . K r e t ,M .E .&S j a k - S h i e ,E .E .P r e p r o c e s s i n gp u p i ls i z ed a t a :g u i d e -
lines and code. Behav. Res. Methods 51,1 3 3 6–1342 (2019).
59. Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E. & Schoffelen, J.-M. FieldTrip: open
source software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive
electrophysiological data.Comput. Intell. Neurosci.2011,
156869 (2011).
60. Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L. & Cassandra, A. R. Planning and acting
in partially observable stochastic domains.Artif. Intell. 101,
99–134 (1998).
Acknowledgements
We thank Julia Wandschura for her help with data collection and Fate-
meh Hadaeghi for her valuable comments. This work is supported by a
DFG/NSFC grant to J.G. and X.F. (CRC TRR 169“Cross-modal Learning”,
NSFC grant 62061136001) and a DFG grant to J.G. (CRC 1528“Cognition
of Interaction”).
Author contributions
Research design—J.G. and T.B. Experimental task and data collection—
T.B. Model development—J.G. Model implementation—T.B. Data analy-
sis—T.B. Paper writing (ﬁrst draft)—T.B. Paper writing (revisions)–T.B.,
J.G., T.S., K.Z., and X.F.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Tatia Buidze or Jan Gläscher.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Paula Rubio-
Fernandez and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution
to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 15

PAGE 16
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article's CreativeCommons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57025-z
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:1989 16