PAGE 1
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
1 
 
Title: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
Authors: Inbal Arnon1*, Liran Carmel2, Nicolas Claidière3,4,5, W. Tecumseh Fitch6, Susan 
Goldin-Meadow7, Simon Kirby8, Kazuo Okanoya9, Limor Raviv10,11, Lucie Wolters12, Simon E. 
Fisher*13,14 
Affiliations:  5 
1 Department of Psychology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.  
2 Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.  
3 Centre de recherche en psychologie et neuroscience, UMR7077, Université Aix -
Marseille/CNRS, Marseille, France.  10 
4 Station de Primatologie-Celphedia, CNRS UAR846, Rousset, France.  
5 Institute for Language, Communication and the Brain, Université Aix-Marseille, CNRS, Aix-
en-Provence, France. 
6 Department of Behavioral and Cognitive Biology, University of Vienna, Austria. 
7 Departments of Psychology and Comparative Human Development, University of Chicago, 15 
USA 
8 Centre for Language Evolution, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.  
9 Advanced Comprehensive Research Organization, Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan. 
10 LEADS group, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
11 Donders Center for Cognition, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands 20 
12 Department of Cognitive and Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, Israel. 
13 Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands. 
14 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The 25 
Netherlands. 
*Corresponding author. Email: inbal.arnon@mail.huji.ac.il, simon.fisher@mpi.nl 
 
Abstract: Explaining the origins of language is a key challenge in understanding ourselves as a 
species. We present an empirical  framework that draws on synergies across fields to facilitate 30 
robust studies of language evolution. The approach is multi -faceted, seeing language emergence 
as dependent on the convergence of multiple capacities, each with their own evolutionary 
trajectories. It is explicitly bio -cultural, recognising and incorporati ng the importance of both 
biological preparedness and cultural transmission, as well as interactions between them. We 
illustrate this approach through three case studies examining the evolution of different facets 35 
involved in human language (vocal production learning, linguistic structure, social underpinnings). 

PAGE 2
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
2 
 
Main Text: Human language is a distinctive trait of our species, yet its origins are still not 
understood (1–4). The lack of any fossil record of the first language(s), together with many 
unknowns about human evolution and animal communication have led some to conclude that this 
question is scientifically intractable (5). We propose instead that studying language evolution lies 
well within the scope of scientific enquiry, when new sources of data and theoretical perspectives 5 
are incorporated. We present an empirical bio -cultural framework  for research on language 
evolution, applying it to three case studies, each examining a different facet involved in human 
language. Our aim is neither to comprehensively review the many existing theories, nor to 
advocate our own special one, but to set an  agenda for future interdisciplinary research, 
highlighting promising avenues.  10 
This approach is multi -faceted in seeing language emergence as dependent on convergence of 
multiple capacities (physical, cognitive, social, cultural), each with its own developmental and 
evolutionary trajectories (see (6, 7)). Proposed facets include those related to production and 
perception of signals (e.g., vocal learning), systematic organisation of language (e.g., linguistic 
structure), and communicative motivations (e.g., aspects of social behaviour). A facet does not 15 
have to be unique to humans or to language to offer explanatory value: Like the evolution of other 
complex biological systems (e.g., the eye), the emergence of language can be explained by 
modifications and recombination of ancestral infrastructures, and exaptation of existing structures 
(8–10). This reflects a move away from “silver bullet” views of language evolution (e.g. (11, 12)), 
where human uniqueness is defined by just one explanatory factor (e.g., a single genetic mutation). 20 
Although such accounts have been historically prolific, persisting in some academic discourse and 
popular science writing, they are untenable in light of modern biology. Considerable evidence 
from multiple sources indicates that no one thing itself was enough to “give us language” or “make 
us human” (13–15). The multi -faceted perspective calls for empirical investigations of larger 
historical windows. While common wisdom was that language is unique to anatomically modern 25 
humans, appearing on the Homo sapiens  lineage within the past 50 -150kyr (e.g. (11, 12)), 
contemporary data suggest that deeper evolutionary timescales, of hundreds of thousands (perhaps 
millions) of years, are more plausible (13, 16–18). Even if the language system as we know it in 
present-day humans only emerged recently, different facets may have evolved over longer 
timescales, under different selective pressures.  30 
Our approach is also bio-cultural, recognizing and incorporating both biological preparedness and 
cultural processes, and the interactions between them, as key factors in language emergence. 
Understanding biological preparedness, including innate learning mechanisms and biases, is 
necessary to explain the uniqueness of human language, and helps guide comparative research on 
non-human species. However, no human infant develops a fully structured language in isolation: 35 
such languages arise only after extended social and communicative interaction (e.g., (19, 20)). 
Over generations, learners progressively systematize language through communication and 
cultural transmission (21–23), processes shaped by properties of the individual and the community 
(24–26). Computational simulations, experiments , and real-word cases of emergence identified 
specific cultural processes necessary for structured language to emerge. One reason non -human 40 
species lack human-like language may be their limited biological capacity to support these cultural 
processes. Importantly, biology and culture can interact in complex  non-intuitive ways. For 
example, the emergence of more complex communication systems can increase selective pressure 
on the cognitive mechanisms required to learn and produce complex signals. This could result in 
virtuous cycles of gene-culture coevolution (Fig. 1), making iterated bio-cultural processes central 45 
to understanding language emergence. Crucially, both classes of phenomena, biological and 

PAGE 3
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
3 
cultural, along with their interactions, can be empirically investigated in humans, non -human 
animals, and simulated/artificial agents (27). 
5 
Figure 1.  Gene-culture co -evolution model. Interacting processes operating on different timescales, from 
milliseconds to millennia, shape language emergence. (A) Processes of language use operate at the shortest 
timescale, as individuals comprehend and produce utterances in ongoing conversation. Learning to form these 
utterances (learning sounds, words, and rules) happens over a lifetime of exposure to the language of the community. 
Zooming out further, the structure of a sp ecific language emerges and changes through cultural evolution, as 10 
knowledge of language is passed from one generation to the next. Finally, the cognitive and anatomical machinery 
that allows humans to learn and use language has been subject to genetic evolution over the course of human evolution. 
The processes of biological and cultural evolution interact to produce a dual-inheritance system (28, 29). Features of 
languages are inherited culturally, and the mechanisms that support such cultural inheritance are themselves inherited 
genetically. These processes may interact in complex and interesting ways, studied using mathematical and 15 
computational models that include all three timescales: individual learning and use; cultural evolution; biological 
evolution. (B) One prominent approach, iterated Bayesian learning (30, 31) treats learning as a process of inductive 
inference, combining utterances that the learner observes with a prior bias favouring particular types of languages. 


PAGE 4
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
4 
Cultural evolution is modelled as a process in which the languages inferred by one generation provide data observed 
by the next generation of learners. Iterated Bayesian learning allows us to compute expected results of cultural 
evolution for any hypothesi sed prior bias learners might have, along with a model of how language is used for 
communication (32). This approach has been extended to the full dual -inheritance model by assuming that priors for 
learners are shaped by their genes, and these genes are selected based on communicative effectiveness of the 5 
individuals in the population (33). One striking finding is that the existence of cultural evolution tends to weaken 
inductive biases in language learning (33). Cultural evolution amplifies weak biases in individual learners, such that 
weak biases have the same outcome at the population level as strong constraints would. If strong biases are costly to 
maintain (e.g. by being more subject to mutation pressure), t hen weak biases are the inevitable consequence. This is 
surprising given previous work on the evolution of learning, which suggests the opposite: that learning can make 10 
evolution of innate constraints more likely (34). 
Bio-cultural and multi-faceted perspectives are increasingly appreciated in discussions of language 
evolution, but there is a need to integrate them in a unifying framework, and show concrete 
examples of how that advances understanding. We demonstrate appl ication of an integrated 
framework through three case studies, targeting different facets important for language emergence: 15 
(1) Vocal production learning: the ability to modify vocalisations based on experience, critical for
acquiring spoken language; (2) Language structure: the systematic ways in which linguistic
elements relate to one another, underlying the productivity of h uman language; and (3) Social
underpinnings: behaviours and processes that facilitate social interaction, enabling cultural
transmission of language. These are not claimed as the sole or primary facets relevant to language20 
evolution, but used to illustrate the value of a bio-cultural framework.
Case study 1: Vocal production learning 
Human language is inherently multi-modal, expressible via speech, sign, writing or touch (35, 36). 
However, when available, speech is the primary modality across societies. Its acquisition depends 
on auditory-guided vocal production learning (VPL): the ability of an organism to flexibly enlarge 25 
and modify its repertoire of vocalisations based on auditory experiences (37, 38). VPL is critical 
for learning the sounds and open -ended vocabulary of language. Non -human primates appear 
much more limited than humans in their capacity to produce new vocalisations, but these abilities 
have emerged in other species, including subsets of birds, bats, cetaceans, pinnipeds, and elephants 
(38). There is increasing evidence that the independent appearance of VPL on different branches 30 
of the evolutionary tree involves deep homology (39, 40), a phenomenon where convergently 
evolved traits recruit similar underlying genetic regulatory mechanisms across species (41). This 
aligns with the idea that some facets of language rely on ancient genetic and neural infrastructures, 
modified and recombined to enable more complex systems/abilities. The relevance of deep 
homology for understanding VPL is illustrated by studies of the FOXP2 gene. 35 
FOXP2 was originally discovered by using human genetics tools (Table 1) to investigate the 
biological bases of developmental speech and language disorders (42). Given adequate exposure 
to spoken language (and in absence of sensory disorders), most children become proficient 
language users within the first years of life. However, there are unusual cases where this process 
goes awry. Before the advent of molecular methods, studies comparing identical and non-identical 40 
twins, and documenting recurrence of cases within families, suggested that genetic factors play a 
role in these otherwise unexplained disorders, without pinpointing the genes involved (43). In 
2001, a rare pathogenic DNA variation in FOXP2 was found to disturb development of the 
coordinated sequencing of mouth and face movements underlying proficient speech (childhood 
apraxia of speech) in a large family, known as the KE family (44) (Fig. 2A). Multiple independent 45 
cases of people carrying FOXP2 disruptions were since reported, with developmental speech 
deficits being the most consistent consequence (45).  

PAGE 5
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
5 
Table 1: Identifying genetic links to language through genomic studies in modern humans. Researchers can investigate genetics of relevant pathologies (childhood 
apraxia of speech, developmental language disorders, etc.) by identifying genetic correlates of individual differences in language-related skills in the general population, 
exploiting advances in molecular methods and analytic approaches (46).  
Type of DNA 
variation 
Biological impact Molecular methods Typical study designs Examples from the literature Linking to evolution 
Rare gene 
disruptions 
Rarely, a change at a 
single genetic locus 
can be sufficient to 
substantially derail 
language 
development. 
Advances in next-
generation 
sequencing now allow 
rapid reading of 
almost all of a 
person’s genome at 
high resolution at a 
fraction of the cost of 
classical methods. 
Pathogenic variants can be identified by 
analysing DNA of relatives in 
multigenerational families where multiple 
individuals have a developmental 
speech/language disorder. 
The first rare gene variants in 
childhood apraxia of speech were 
discovered by studying a three-
generation family, before the 
advent of next-generation 
sequencing (44). 
The evolutionary history of 
genes implicated in 
speech/language disorders 
can be retraced, by 
comparing to versions 
found in extinct archaic 
hominins and extant apes, 
and testing for evidence of 
Darwinian selection at 
these genomic loci on the 
lineage leading to Homo 
sapiens (47, 48). 
A complementary approach investigates de 
novo cases of disorder (where 
parents/siblings are unaffected) to identify 
pathogenic DNA variants that are only 
present in the affected child. 
Whole genome sequencing in 
speech apraxia has since 
identified pathogenic de novo 
disruptions of multiple candidate 
genes, with regulatory roles in 
early brain development (49). 
Common 
variation 
Many studies focus 
on single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms 
(SNPs) found at >1% 
frequency in general 
population. Any one 
SNP by itself has little 
impact, but 
combinations of 
many such variants 
across the genome 
may jointly explain a 
significant proportion 
of trait variance. 
High-throughput low-
cost genotyping 
technologies, like 
DNA microarrays, 
make it possible to 
capture allelic 
variation at millions 
of SNPs in large 
samples. 
These technologies 
fuelled the rise of 
genome-wide 
association studies 
(GWASs) that 
systematically screen 
vast numbers of 
SNPs, testing each for 
a relationship with a 
trait of interest. 
One GWAS design is a case/control study 
assessing contributions of common DNA 
variation to a disorder (or categorical trait). 
GWAS designs can also identify associations 
of SNPs with individual differences in 
quantitative traits. Since the effect size of 
one SNP may be tiny, cohorts of tens (even 
hundreds) of thousands of people are 
needed to give adequate power while 
adjusting for substantial multiple-testing. 
In a multicohort GWAS study of 
individual differences in 
quantitatively assessed reading- 
and language-related skills, 
involving <34,000 participants, 
researchers could capture up to 
26% of trait variability with 
common DNA variation (50). 
Findings on genetic 
contributions to individual 
differences in language-
related skills and/or neural 
infrastructure in living 
humans can be integrated 
with information about 
evolutionary signatures 
across the genome, over a 
range of different 
timescales in primate and 
hominin history. For 
example, a UK Biobank 
study used this approach to 
uncover effects of human-
gained regulatory elements 
on left-hemisphere brain 
regions related to speech, 
among other findings (47, 
48). 
Studies of genetic associations with 
language-related traits can be extended to 
individual differences in brain structure and 
function, assessed with neuroimaging. Effect 
sizes of individual SNPs are small even for 
traits measured with MRI (51). With 
availability of neuroimaging and DNA data in 
large biobanking resources it is now possible 
to carry out GWAS studies of neural circuits 
involved in language processing. 
GWAS investigations of structural 
and functional connectivity in the 
brains of ~30-32,000 participants 
in the UK Biobank have given 
new insights into how genetic 
variants contribute to language-
related circuits in the human 
brain (52, 53). 

PAGE 6
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
6 
Figure 2. Investigating evolution of vocal production learning with  tools of molecular genetics: FOXP2 as an 
example. (A) The starting point was a three-generation family, the KE family, in which half of the relatives (shaded 
symbols) were affected by a neurodevelopmental disorder primarily involving childhood apraxia of speech, 
accompanied by expressive and receptive language deficits (top). The affected relatives carried a change of one DNA 5 
letter (nucleotide) in the FOXP2 gene (44). This small change in DNA alters the amino -acid sequence, and hence 
shape, of a key part of the regulatory protein that FOXP2 encodes, stopping it from functioning in its normal way. 
Advances in DNA sequencing led to identification of >28 additional individuals (from 17 families) carrying different 
pathogenic single -nucleotide variants of FOXP2, with problems in speech development being the most common 
feature found in these cases (45). As shown in the bottom of the panel, while pathogenic variants were sometimes 10 
inherited from affected parents, in many of the cases they arose de novo in children with unaffected parents. (B) 
Comparisons of DNA sequences across different species (comparative genomics) identified versions of FOXP2 in 
distantly related vertebrates including mammals, birds, reptiles, fish, and amphibians (40, 54), showing that the gene 
has a deep evolutionary history. Against this background, integration of findings from extant apes and extinct archaic 
hominins revealed that changes in the amino-acid sequence of the encoded protein occurred on the Homo lineage after 15 
splitting from chimpanzees/bonobos (55). (C) Researchers engineered mouse models that carry the same pathogenic 
variant that causes speech problems in the KE family. Investigations of these mice reported motor -skill learning 
deficits (56), reduced plasticity in the striatum (part of the basal ganglia) (57), disturbed intracellular ‘protein motors’ 
in striatal neurons (58), and loss of neuronal homeostasis in deep -layer cortical neurons (59) among other findings. 
(D) Moving to songbirds, lentivirus-mediated RNA interference has been used to reduce activity of FoxP2 (the avian20 
equivalent of FOXP2) in Area X, a key nucleus in the basal ganglia of male zebra finches. Such studies uncovered
effects of the gene on song learning and the control of song variability, potentially mediated by changes in
dopaminergic signalling (60–62). (E) When researchers used genetic manipulations to introduce hominin amino-acid
substitutions of FOXP2 into mice, they observed regional changes in dopamine levels and increased plasticity in the
striatum (63). Motor-skill learning and vocal behaviours of adult male mice were unaffected according to one study25 
(64), but later investigations of female and male vocalisations in social contexts found that the partially “humanized”
mice used higher frequencies and more complex syllable types (65). Another study of these mice uncovered different
patterns of striatal -dependent stimulus-response association learning (66). Overall, this suite of human and animal
model studies shows how genes involved in VPL can be empirically investigated across species to give new insights
into evolutionary pathways.30 


PAGE 7
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
7 
Once FOXP2 was identified in humans, researchers looked for versions of the gene in other 
species, retracing its evolutionary history. Cross-species DNA comparisons (Fig. 2B) revealed that 
FOXP2 is not unique to humans, but evolutionarily ancient, with similar versions in disparate 
vertebrates including mammals, birds, reptiles, fish, and amphibians (40, 54). There is high 
species-wide concordance in the places where this gene is active in the developing/adult central 5 
nervous system, including in subsets of neurons in the cortex/pallium, basal ganglia, thalamus, and 
cerebellum. These findings suggested that contributions of FOXP2 to human speech may be built 
on ancient evolutionary pathways involved in motor-skill learning and vocal behaviours (67). Such 
deep evolutionary conservation means that genetic manipulations of versions of FOXP2 in non-
human species can help elucidate its functions, and how these influence brain plasticity and 10 
behaviour (68, 69). 
For instance, though mice have very limited VPL capacities (70), valuable insights were gained 
from mouse models engineered to carry FOXP2 disruptions known to cause speech disorders in 
humans (Fig. 2C). Mice carrying the pathogenic variant of the KE family show motor -skill 
learning deficits, and altered neuronal properties in basal ganglia and cortex (56–59), among other 15 
findings. Investigating non-human animals that are vocal learners, such as songbirds, is even more 
revealing (Fig, 2D). Male zebra finches sing structured songs comprising vocal elements 
(syllables) arranged in a stereotyped sequence, which they learn as juveniles by listening to adult 
males (69). During this developmental period of plasticity, FoxP2 (the avian version of FOXP2) 
has elevated activity in Area X, a basal ganglia structure that is crucial for VPL (69). 20 
Experimentally reducing FoxP2 Area-X activity interferes with song -learning and variability, 
potentially mediated by disturbed dopaminergic signalling (60–62). Thus, impacts of this gene on 
brain plasticity linked to sensorimotor functions and motor -skill learning may have been 
independently recruited towards VPL in disparate species (i.e. supporting speech in humans and 
song in zebra finches). Most recently, g enome-wide investigations of >200 mammals with 25 
different vocal-learning capacities pinpointed multiple additional genetic loci as candidates for 
cross-species involvement in VPL (71). 
Identifying genes contributing to VPL across species allows researchers to use a transformative 
new data source to test hypotheses about language evolution: ancient DNA. In the last fifteen years, 
it became possible to obtain high -quality sequence informat ion from nuclear genomes of 30 
Neanderthals and Denisovans: extinct hominins that shared with modern humans a most recent 
common ancestor ~600kyr ago  (72, 73). These archaic hominins existed until a few tens of 
thousands of years ago, temporarily overlapping with Homo sapiens at sites across Eurasia (74). 
Analysing ancient genomes enables detection of DNA variants that arose in modern humans after 
our split from Neanderthals and Denisovans (75). It also enables detection of variants that we share 35 
with archaic hominins, but that are distinct from those in extant non -human apes. These more 
ancient variants arose after our split from chimpanzees/bonobos ~6 million years ago, but before 
the split between modern and archaic humans (76). Applied to FOXP2, this approach identified 
two amino-acid changes in the protein that it encodes, both arising on the Homo lineage during the 
6Myr-600kyr time window (55). Researchers used genetic manipulations to introduce the hominin 40 
amino-acid substitutions into mice, observing varied effects on vocal behaviours and basal ganglia 
functions (63–66) (Fig. 2E). Thus, by identifying evolutionary variants in genes implicated in 
facets of language and introducing them into non-human animals, we can investigate whether these 
variants affect brains and behaviour in ways that might be relevant to language emergence. Despite 
this promise, we stress that no single genetic change is by itself sufficient to yield a vocal-learning 45 
brain (77).  

PAGE 8
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
8 
Evolution acts not only through genetically -specified changes to protein structure and function, 
but also by modifying where and when genes/proteins are active in development and adulthood 
(78, 79). These effects are mediated by a wide variety of regulatory elements in the genome. Many 
of the DNA variants distinguishing us from other extant apes and extinct hominins may lie within 
such elements. For example, among primates FOXP2 shows human -specific expression in 5 
microglia, the primary immune cells of the brain, although the regulatory elements responsible for 
this specificity are not yet described (80). Moreover, innovations in paleoepigenetics take 
advantage of degradation processes in ancient DNA to reconstruct patterns of methylation, a 
chemical modification that helps mediate changes in gene activity without changing DNA 
sequence itself. This approa ch revealed changes in gene regulation differentiating 10 
Neanderthals/Denisovans from modern humans (81). Several of these modern human -specific 
gene-expression changes are associated with genes that affect the face and voice, and may underlie 
characteristics that are unique to modern humans (82). 
Additional insights into VPL evolution come from considering developmental processes . Take 
babbling: an early, self -initiated form of vocal production in infants that starts as simple and 15 
repetitive verbal “play” but gradually approaches a mature form. Babbling -like behaviours have 
been documented in humans, songbirds, parrots (83, 84), and vocal-learning bats (85, 86) but are 
not common in species lacking VPL. Manual “babbling” is seen in hearing and deaf human babies 
exposed to signed language from birth (87, 88), illustrating both the multimodality of language 
and the role of babbling in language acquisition. Deaf babies also babble vocally, but this babbling 20 
does not progress normally when appropriate input models are inaccessible (89), demonstrating 
how biological preparedness and environmental input interact in language learning. 
Babbling (termed ‘subsong’ in birds) is self -generated and self -rewarding, occurring without 
immediate environmental triggers or exogenous rewards. Thus, part of the biological preparedness 
for VPL includes an endogenous reward system, making vocal play en joyable to the young 25 
organism without feedback from parents or others. Although little is known about the underlying 
circuity in humans, recent evidence implicates endogenous reward in songbird vocal behaviours. 
Avian song learning begins with a sensory learning period in whic h the bird stores auditory 
templates of exemplars of its species’ song. This involves an endogenously rewarding listening 
process (90, 91): juveniles selectively attend to and memorize songs of their own species indicating 30 
that hearing them is intrinsically rewarding (91). Endogenous reward is key during the subsequent 
sensory-motor learning period when spontaneous subsong is gradually adjusted, without external 
feedback, to approach stored adult template(s) (92–96). Vocal practice correlates temporally with 
neural expression of opioid markers and increased activity in reward systems (92), and blocking 
dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia in young zebra finches impairs song copying (95). Later 35 
in development, both infant babbling and bird subsong are impacted by social reinforcement (e.g. 
(96)) but the early self -reinforcing stages are required to provide raw material for later, 
exogenously directed, learning. Evolution of VPL may therefore depend both on changes to neural 
circuits involved in learning and also those underlying endogenous reward. 
40 
Case study 2: The emergence of linguistic structure 
Human language shows systematic structure at multiple levels and of multiple kinds. Elements can 
be combined in productive ways, with the meaning of larger units composed of the meanings of 
their parts (e.g., cat – cats – big cats). There is ongoing debate on how to define and quantify this 
systematicity. Here, we classify a behaviour as systematic when it can be described more concisely 45 

PAGE 9
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
9 
as a set than as a collection of individual instances. “Grammars” in linguistics (in the most theory-
neutral use of that term) refer to these shorter descriptions, and are possible because language is 
systematic. For example, it is more concise to describe  formation of the regular English plural 
using the rule “add -s to the singular form” than to list all plural forms. While prevalent in human 
language, systematicity is rare in the vast majority of communication systems in nature. An 5 
extensive literature investigates neural correlates of systematic language structure (see e.g. (35, 
97)); comparing those circuits across humans and non -human primates offers ways to study their 
evolution (e.g. (98–100)). While illuminating, this literature leaves open  how linguistic structure 
first came about.  
Over the past 25 years, various experimental and computational methods have been developed to 10 
study origins of systematic linguistic structure (22, 101–104), and to ask how that structure is 
shaped by cognitive and communicative pressures. Specifically, language must serve the 
communicative needs of interacting language users, and be learnable by subsequent generations 
of language users. Because language is culturally transmitted (passed on by being repeatedly 
learned and used by multiple generations), its structure is impacted by the interplay of 15 
communicative and cognitive forces. To illustrate, we here focus on one feature: combinatoriality, 
the fact that language has units that can be recombined, at multiple levels of linguistic analysis  
(24, 105–108). For instance, sounds can be combined into words, and words can be combined to 
form sentences. 
How did this combinatoriality emerge? We have no access to, or record of, hominin 20 
communication systems preceding modern human languages. However, insights can come from 
real-world cases of emergence (109) and lab-based studies recreating evolutionary processes in 
miniature (25, 110, 111). Two real -world settings illuminate the pressures and biases impacting 
the emergence of linguistic structure in modern -day humans. One is homesign: gesture systems 
created by individuals whose hearing loss prevented them from accessing spoken language and  25 
who were not exposed to sign language (112). Another is emerging sign languages, where novel 
signed languages develop in communities with a high proportion of deaf individuals, lacking 
access to an established signed language. An influential example is Nicaraguan Sign Language 
(NSL), which spontaneously emerged when homesigners were first brought together in the mid -
1980s (113). Examining how linguistic structure in such systems changes over time illustrates how 30 
individual learning and cultural transmission impact the emergence of structure. 
Researchers have documented and compared linguistic structure in solo language creators 
(homesign); in homesigners who came together and formed the first NSL cohort (NSL1); and in 
subsequent cohorts of signers who entered the community after the language began and were thus 
exposed to a language model (NSL2, NSL3, etc.). Some linguistic structural properties are 35 
observed in solo creators, irrespective of the specific cultural environment they were raised in. 
Child homesigners in the USA, China, Turkey, and Nicaragua use gestures to refer to objects, 
actions, and attributes, and combine them into strings characterised by consistent word order. For 
example, gestures for the object of an action appear before gestures for the action, yielding ‘grape-
eat’ as opposed to ‘eat -grape’ (112, 114) (Fig. 3). These same properties appear across societies, 40 
without exposure to linguistic input, indicating shared human cognitive biases (e.g. hierarchical 
structure: (115)). Other properties emerge only after homesigners come together to form NSL1 
(e.g. a stable lexicon: (114)), highlighting the importance of communication with others in shaping 
linguistic structure. Still other linguistic properties are not produced by homesigners or in NSL1, 
but tend to appear only after the emerging sign languages are transmitted to new lear ners. For 45 

PAGE 10
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
10 
example, spatial modulations are rare in NSL1, but commonly used to indicate shared reference in 
NSL2 (19). 
A well-studied feature of NSL, relevant to combinatoriality, involves how complex motion events 
are conveyed. Consider a ball bouncing down a hill. In early NSL cohorts, both the ball’s path 
(downwards) and its movement manner (bouncing) are typically conveyed simultaneously ((113) 5 
but see (116)). However, later cohorts typically segment path and manner into separate parts, 
yielding a more combinatorial flexible system. Thus, transmission from one cohort to another 
seems important for building and enhancing combinatoriality. In an experimental an alog of the 
homesign situation, non -signing participants are asked to convey meanings with gesture and no 
speech (117). When presented with complex motion events possessing manner and path 10 
components, participants prefer to convey both aspects simultaneously even if expressed 
separately in their spoken language   (118). However, gestures  and vocalisations  beginning as 
holistic (e.g., simultaneously expressing motion and speed) become more segmented and 
linearised during ongoing dyadic communication  (119–121).  
Experiments can recreate processes of cultural evolution using a paradigm called iterated learning. 15 
In these studies, a participant learns from the output of a previous participant in the experiment, 
creating multiple simulated “generations” (22). When silent gestures get transmitted in this way, 
there is a learning-driven preference for segmented manner and path. This preference is amplified 
over generations (as in NSL2 (113)) so that more systematic and combinatorial behaviours emerge 
(119, 121). More generally, productive units emerge during dyadic and group communication 20 
paradigms (25, 120, 122, 123), a process enhanced by learning and transmission (32). The 
combined findings illustrate that systems starting as a collection of wholes are gradually segmented 
and analysed into productive parts, consistent with evolutionary approaches proposing a holistic 
origin for language (124, 125). Further evidence for the role of whole-to-part learning comes from 
first language acquisition (126, 127) and homesign creation (128, 129), where learners discover 25 
parts from unanalyzed wholes (e.g. Ididit > I did it, (130)), in ways that facilitate the mastery and 
emergence of systematic structure ((131, 132), Fig. 3). 
Figure 3. Finding the right units. One of the challenges in studying communication in children and non -human 30 
animals is zeroing in on the right unit of analysis. This is challenging because the units we use to code data are 
influenced by hypotheses (explicit or implicit (133)), often based on our own categories. For example, when we 
describe early child language, we typically attribute individuated words to the child ( left-hand panel). But we might 
be wrong––a child might use a larger unit, treating several words as a single “chunk” (127, 134). Infants extract single 
word units from the speech they hear, but they also extract larger units containing more than one lexical word (126, 35 


PAGE 11
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
11 
130). In fact, starting from larger units plays an important role in learning linguistic structure, particularly in learning 
grammatical relations between words (126, 127, 131, 132), and in creating linguistic structure (129). One way to 
validate the categories we use is to find systematic patterns based on those categories, providing indirect evidence for 
the categories, and also for their level of representation. For instance, using semantic roles (patient, act, recipient, etc.) 
to categorize homesigners’ gestures results in systematic orderings (patient-act, patient-recipient, act-recipient), which 5 
validates coding at this level (135). But sometimes our coding system fails to produce systematic patterns. This may 
be the time to scrap the system and start again, coding at a level smaller than the one previously used (middle panel). 
For example, homesigners could vary thumb -to-finger distance so that the handshape in the gesture for banana -
grasping is distinct from that in the gesture for spoon-grasping (as they are when these objects are actually grasped). 
Alternatively, homesigners could use the same handshape in both gestures, introduc ing one larger category for 10 
grasping objects <1 -inch in diameter. To discover the homesigner’s categories, we need to code in units that are 
smaller than the units on which those categories are based; otherwise, the categories may be created by us, not the 
child (128, 136). When we seek the right units in non -human communication (e.g., gestures in great apes (137)), the 
challenge is greater, because we have limited insight into the categories relevant to non -human animals ( (138) and 
must validate the categories in the animal itself (e.g., by using playback experiments, (139)). Nonetheless, the 15 
approach of seeking out coherent patterns can also help reveal units in animal communication ( righthand panel). For 
example, using transitional probabilities between syllables to segment humpback whale song (a cue used by human 
infants to segment speech (140)) uncovered statistically coherent sub -sequences whose frequency distribution 
followed a particular power law, also found in all human languages (141). This points to a striking similarity between 
two evolutionarily distant species (whales and humans), united by having culturally transmitted communication 20 
systems. Debates about how to detect the appropriate units continue (142), with new perspectives coming from 
machine learning (143). In general, allowing for units at multiple levels of representation provides insight into 
structure in child language, homesign, and animal communication (144). 
Real-world language emergence and lab -based studies necessarily involve humans with modern 25 
brains, but are nevertheless informative. Linguistic features evident in homesign provide insights 
into products of biological evolution. Properties that homesigners fail to develop, but are found in 
emerging sign languages, are good candidates for ones th at require cultural evolution to emerge  
(20). With lab-based studies researchers can manipulate communicative and cognitive pressures 
in ways that cannot be done in the real -world, to assess effects on emerging systems. Moreover, 30 
computational simulations, not yet discussed (but see Fig. 1, and (145, 146)) allow investigation 
of learning biases that may differ from those of modern humans. Importantly, it is still an open 
question which, if any, capabilities underlying language structure are uniquely enhanced in 
humans. One component hypothesised as highly developed in humans and weak or absent in other 
species is “dendrophilia”, a domain-general proclivity to infer tree structures from data whenever 35 
possible (147) (Fig. 4).  

PAGE 12
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
12 
Figure 4 . The origins of hierarchical structure - Dendrophilia or semantics?  An open question for the field 
concerns which, if any, capabilities underlying language are uniquely enhanced in humans . One component 
hypothesised as highly developed in humans and weak or absent in other species is “dendrophilia”, a domain-general 
proclivity to infer tree structures from data whenever possible (147). Dendrophilia combines a domain -general 5 
capacity to perceive hierarchical structures in stimuli with a strong preference to encode data into hierarchical 
structures. (A) This preference is often studied using Artificial Grammar Learning (AGL) experiments where learners 
are exposed to sequences of stimuli whose appearance is governed by an underlying hierarchical grammar. If learners 
deduced the grammar, they should be able  to complete sequences in a way that conforms to it. Considerable 
experimental evidence from cross -species AGL research supports dendrophilia as being both highly developed and 10 
biologically canalised in humans, and reduced or absent in other species studied to date (6, 148, 149). For example, a 
recent study found that, with adequate time and a consistent exogenous reward structure, macaque monkeys can learn 
hierarchical structures based on meaningless spatial/motor sequences, but learning requiring many months and tens 
of thousands of rewarded trials. In contrast, pre -school children learn these same systems rapidly, in as few as six 
trials, with few/no errors (149). The presence of some hierarchical structure in homesign (case study 2) offers further 15 
evidence of biological preparedness for dendrophilia in our species (115). However, the finding that linguistic structure 
emerges gradually over generations indicates that cultural transmission is important for explaining hierarchical 
structure in fully developed languages (as for birdsong). Some precursor(s) of dendrophilia may be present in the 
motor and/or social domain in other primates, such as the perception and processing of complex dominance 
hierarchies, as shown in baboons and other socially complex species (150–152). (B) The problem of acquiring and 20 
using tree-like structures may be greatly reduced in contexts involving signal/meaning pairs (as in human language). 
If semantics already possess hierarchical structure, and signals are mapped onto this hierarchical meaning space, it 
may strongly bias the learner to impose or perceive tree structure in the signals themselves. Importantly, the existence 
of hierarchical structure in human music (e.g. (153)), or similar systems like bird or whale song (e.g. (154)), where 
signals do not map onto highly structured meanings, suggests that compositional semantic mappings are not necessary 25 
(or solely responsible) for hierarchical structure to emerge. Similarly, in AGL experiments, humans readily perceive 
hierarchical structure in meaningless visual strings (155, 156). Better understanding of the neural mechanisms 
involved in structural learning, and innovative new methods to “tweak” reward structures in animals, can shed light 
on origins of hierarchical structure not just in language but also other domains such as music and art. 
So far, we illustrated impacts of learning, communication, and cultural transmission in creating 30 
combinatorial structure in humans who are already biologically prepared for language. Roles of 
biological evolution can be investigated using animal models.  Here, researchers control 
preparedness via the choice of species, while experimentally manipulating social pressures and 


PAGE 13
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
13 
 
rewards. Two relevant models are songbirds and baboons, who differ from humans, and from each 
other, in important ways. As introduced in case study 1, songbirds are vocal production learners, 
with culturally transmitted song (157, 158). Songbirds are also among the few non-human animals 
whose signalling exhibits combinatorial structure. Songs are constructed from individual elements 
that are repeated and recombined (159). Despite their “instinct to learn” a species -typical song 5 
(160), isolated songbirds deprived of appropriate input sing only a harsh, atonal “isolate song” 
(159). When isolate songs are transmitted to successive generations of learners via iterated 
learning, zebra finches  converge within a few generations on a novel (albeit well -formed and 
species-typical) song exhibiting combinatorial structure (161). Even if this developmental process 
is limited to one bird hearing its own songs played back after a delay, a more species-typical song 10 
results (162). Transmission over generations/iterations seems crucial for emergence of elaborated 
species-typical structure, whether the starting point is  isolate song in vocal -learning bird s, or 
homesign in humans. 
Songbirds are biologically prepared to learn and transmit songs. In contrast, despite powerful 
learning abilities (163–165), non -human primates lack culturally transmitted communication 15 
systems, and the combinatoriality of their gestural signalling is not as productive or widespread as 
in humans or songbirds (166). Recent evidence indicates a degree of combinatoriality in 
vocalizations of some ape/primate species  (167, 167, 168), though it is unclear whether they are 
used communicatively. Experiments with captive  baboons suggest that systematically structured 
behaviour can emerge in animals lacking it, if cultural transmission is supported externally (169). 20 
In these studies, baboons are given exogenous rewards for reproducing randomly generated visual 
patterns. Cultural transmission is experimentally simulated by providing patterns from one baboon 
as input to another, creating an iterated learning design. Remarkably, systematically structured 
patterns emerge over iterations : although  baboons lack biological preparedness for cultural 
transmission, when transmission is supported externally, structured patterns emerge. These 25 
experiments demonstrate that adding exogenous rewards for copying behaviour (present 
endogenously in humans and songbirds) facilitates the emergence of systematicity.  
 
Case study 3: Social underpinnings of language 
Social interactions are key for first language acquisition, with individual learning typically 30 
occurring within interactive contexts (170, 171). These interactions provide children with valuable 
linguistic input, facilitating learning in various ways (172). Although infants can learn in non -
communicative settings, and do so in experimental contexts (140, 173, 174), many aspects of 
language learning are facilitated by social interaction (172). For instance, contingent maternal 
responses yield more mature vocalisations in human infants (175). Similarly, learning of non -35 
native phonetic sounds in infancy is enhanced by social interaction (176). Both homesign and 
emerging sign languages (case study 2) are motivated by the need and desire for social 
communication (although in homesign, the communications systems themselves are not shared 
with others (177)). Later in development, there is evidence of bi -directional links between 
language abilities and aspects of social cognition/interaction (178–180). Gains in prosocial 40 
behaviours in early childhood (age 3 -to-5 years) are significantly associated with later gains in 
verbal ability (age 5-to-11 years), and vice versa (181). Better language skills facilitate children’s 
social–emotional competence, allowing formation of more prosocial, cooperative relationships 
(181–185). Conversely, language difficulties often associate with increased difficulty with social 
interactions (186–188).  45 

PAGE 14
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
14 
 
Social interaction contributes to individual learning in other species with culturally transmitted 
communication systems. Although we stress the importance of endogenous reward during early 
birdsong acquisition, exogenous reinforcement from social partners  is crucial in later learning, 
maintenance, and modification of song (189, 190). Female cowbirds provide behavioural feedback 
(wing-flaps) to courting males, influencing later use of particular syllables or syllable sequences 5 
(189). When parent zebra finches give behavioural feedback, juveniles develop more accurate 
copies of tutor song (190). Exogenous reward of vocal learning involves dopaminergic systems 
(191, 192). Socially-tutored zebra finches show higher activity of dopaminergic neurons in the 
ventral tegmental area, compared to birds who passively heard songs or untutored controls (191), 
and optogenetically blocking dopaminergic input to song circuits during social tutoring impairs 10 
song learning (96).  
Beyond social underpinnings which enable cultural transmission of language, humans have a 
strong, unparalleled internal drive to socially share information, including about inner states, 
emotions and ideas, using language (“Mitteilungsbedürfnis”, (2)). Sharing for sharing’s sake is 
prevalent in humans, but rare in non -human primates. Even language -trained apes, who master 15 
aspects of human sign language, show limited interest in using this to express things other than 
direct requests (193, 194). In contrast, our drive to share thoughts and feelings with others is so 
strong that humans create a communication system de novo even if one is not available (case study 
2).  
The social context, together with our “mitteilungsbedürfnis”, make language learning and use 20 
rewarding for humans. How might the evolution of reward mechanisms relate to emergence of 
communication systems?  One evolutionary pathway of potential relevance is the process of 
domestication. The Bengalese finch, a domesticated variant of a wild songbird, the white-rumped 
munia (195–199), offers an example of relationships between changes in reward and 
communication systems. As in many domesticates, stress hormone levels are significantly lower 25 
in Bengalese finches compared to munias (197), and the former display less aggression (198) and 
explore new environments faster than their wild counterparts (199). Intriguingly, Bengalese 
finches produce songs with greater phonological and syntactic complexity than those of munias 
(200). They are capable of learning munia songs, whereas munias struggle to master Bengalese 
songs (195). Domesticated Bengalese show higher concentrations of cerebral oxytocin than their 30 
wild ancestors (201, 202); oxytocin and dopaminergic reward systems are known to be closely 
interconnected (203–205).  
Did humans follow evolutionary pathways similar to those underlying animal domestication, 
where less aggressive individuals that were more prone to cooperatively interact had greater 
likelihood to survive and/or reproduce? According to the human self -domestication hypothesis, 35 
such processes enhanced social learning and cultural transmission in humans (206–209). This 
could generate virtuous cycles at the community-level: increased social reward for communication 
favours emergence of more advanced forms of communication, enabling larger in-groups and more 
interaction with non -kin, which results in even richer soc ial interaction. Some support for links 
between greater communicative complexity and greater social complexity (operationalized by 40 
larger group sizes, more dense networks, etc.) comes from multi -species comparative research, 
from bats to primates (210, 211). Human experimental data provide suggestive evidence: artificial 
languages evolving in larger micro -societies of interacting participants show more systematic 
compositional structures, emerging faster and more consistently than in smaller groups (25). 
 45 

PAGE 15
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
15 
 
Discussion 
Our case studies include diverse data sources (behavioural, neural, genetic, developmental), and 
adopt broad comparative perspectives, with particular focus on humans, primates and songbirds. 
They demonstrate how facets involved in language emergence can be insightfully studied in non-
humans. No single method, tool or model holds all the answers, and investigations of different 5 
facets may require different approaches. A common thread is that exaptation and recombination 
of abilities present in non -humans, combined with intra - and inter -generational cultural 
transmission, can yield linguistic capacities in our own species. VPL, crucial for acquiring spoken 
language in humans, is a capacity that humans share with other species, appearing in diverse 
branches of the vertebrate evolutionary tree. Social underpinnings needed for human language 10 
transmission are documented in other species with culturally transmitted systems, but humans also 
demonstrate communicative tendencies rarely observed in non -human animals (e.g., our 
“mitteilungsbedürfnis”). Emergence of linguistic structure, a defining pr operty of human 
language, involves a combination of biological, cognitive, and cultural conditions: While some (or 
all) conditions are shared with various non -human species, the combination may be unique to 15 
humans.  
The case studies illustrate the value of explicit bio -cultural framing, showing how language 
emerges dynamically at three  distinct but interacting levels: the individual (language acquisition 
and use), the community (cultural evolution and historical language change), and the species 
(biological evolution). The human ability to acquire and use language, and languages themselves, 20 
result from multiple interactions, over time, among these levels, making all three important for 
understanding language emergence. Biological evolution generates the biological preparedness to 
acquire language shared by all human infants. Via individual learning in a social setting, the child 
acquires the language(s) of their community, which themselves develop through dynamic 
processes of cultural evolution. The ways in which these distinct levels interact, constrain, and 25 
structure one another can be non -intuitive. Understanding them requires combinations of data, 
models, and experiments.  
A recurring theme  and promising avenue for future research, is the  role of biological reward 
systems in language evolution . These systems include the motivation to communicate, and both 
endogenous and exogenous reward for successful imitation and communication during language 30 
acquisition, use, and transmission. Although it is currently impossible to “insert” endogenous 
rewards for babbling into species that lack them, we can experimentally block such rewards, as 
shown for songbirds (case study 1 (95)). Further, we can experimentally introduce exogenous 
rewards to trigger learning in species that lack endogenous reward systems for the learned 
behaviour; potentially “unmasking” cognitive capabilities that were previously unexpressed in that 35 
species, as in baboon studies (case study 2 (212)). These experiments can empirically circumvent 
the common criticism that investigating modern humans, who are already biologically prepared to 
acquire language, reveals nothing about how key facets evolved. 
An open issue concerns modality. Like many researchers, we see language as inherently multi -
modal (36), and our case studies consider both spoken and signed languages. However, we have 40 
not discussed possibilities that the use of visual and auditory modalities may emphasise different 
types of structure. Because gestural capabilities of apes greatly exceed their vocal flexibility, some 
researchers have suggested that human language origins may be found in gesture and/or sign 
(“gestural protolanguage”), rather than speech (213–215), while others vehemently deny this (216, 
217). The multi -faceted bio -cultural framework , combined with recent data showing that like 45 
humans, primates are multi -modal communications (218–220) strongly suggest that gesture co -

PAGE 16
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
16 
 
existed with vocal communication, and eventually language, all along . Furthermore, vocal -
learning abilities might have already been enhanced in archaic hominins like Neanderthals (case 
study 1), although they likely lacked fully modern language. Thus, “which came first, sign or 
speech?” is the wrong question. Productive future debate should centre on how gesture and speech 
support one another, and why language (unlike, say, birdsong) is flexible enough to be conveyed 5 
by radically different sensory systems. 
 
References and Notes 
1. M. H. Christiansen & S. Kirby, "Language evolution: The Hardest Problem in Science?" in 
Language Evolution., M.H. Christiansen, & S. Kirby,eds. (OUP Oxford, 2003), pp. 1–15. 10 
2. W. T. Fitch, The Evolution of Language (Cambridge University Press, 2010). 
3. J. H. Stam, Inquiries Into the Origin of Language: The Fate of a Question (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1976). 
4. G. Révész, The Origins and Prehistory of Language (New York: Philosophical Library, 
1956). 15 
5. M. D. Hauser, C. Yang, R. C. Berwick, I. Tattersall, M. J. Ryan, J. Watumull, N. Chomsky, 
& R. C. Lewontin, The mystery of language evolution. Frontiers in Psychology 5, (2014). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00401. 
6. W. T. Fitch, Empirical approaches to the study of language evolution. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review 24, 3–33 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1236-5. 20 
7. E. H. Lenneberg, Biological Foundations of Language (New York: NY: Wiley, 1967). 
8. S. J. Gould & E. S. Vrba, Exaptation-A Missing Term in the Science of Form. Paleobiology 
8, 4–15 (1982). 
9. W. T. Fitch, The Evolution of Syntax: An Exaptationist Perspective. Frontiers in 
Evolutionary Neuroscience 3, (2011). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnevo.2011.00009. 25 
10. S. E. Fisher & G. F. Marcus, The eloquent ape: genes, brains and the evolution of language. 
Nature Reviews Genetics 7, 9–20 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1747. 
11. R. G. Klein, The Dawn of Human Culture (Turner Publishing Company, 2007). 
12. T. J. Crow, Schizophrenia as the price that Homo sapiens pays for language: a resolution of 
the central paradox in the origin of the species. Brain Research Reviews 31, 118–129 30 
(2000). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-0173(99)00029-6. 
13. A. Bergström, C. Stringer, M. Hajdinjak, E. M. L. Scerri, & P. Skoglund, Origins of 
modern human ancestry. Nature 590, 229–237 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-03244-5. 

PAGE 17
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
17 
 
14. K. Laland & A. Seed, Understanding Human Cognitive Uniqueness. Annual Review of 
Psychology 72, 689–716 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-062220-051256. 
15. J. R. Hurford, The Origins of Grammar: Language in the Light of Evolution II (OUP 
Oxford, 2012). 
16. Y. Mathov, D. Batyrev, E. Meshorer, & L. Carmel, Harnessing epigenetics to study human 5 
evolution. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 62, 23–29 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2020.05.023. 
17. P. Skoglund & I. Mathieson, Ancient Genomics of Modern Humans: The First Decade. 
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 19, 381–404 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-083117-021749. 10 
18. Y. Liu, E. A. Bennett, & Q. Fu, Evolving ancient DNA techniques and the future of human 
history. Cell 185, 2632–2635 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.009. 
19. A. Senghas & M. Coppola, Children Creating Language: How Nicaraguan Sign Language 
Acquired a Spatial Grammar. Psychological Science 12, 323–328 (2001). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00359. 15 
20. S. Goldin-Meadow, What language creation can tell us about language evolution 
(American Psychologist, 2025). 
21. L. Raviv, A. Meyer, & S. Lev-Ari, Compositional structure can emerge without 
generational transmission. Cognition 182, 151–164 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.09.010. 20 
22. S. Kirby, H. Cornish, & K. Smith, Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An 
experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 105, 10681–10686 (2008). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707835105. 
23. Y. Motamedi, M. Schouwstra, K. Smith, J. Culbertson, & S. Kirby, Evolving artificial sign 25 
languages in the lab: From improvised gesture to systematic sign. Cognition 192, 103964 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2019.05.001. 
24. S. Kirby & M. Tamariz, Cumulative cultural evolution, population structure and the origin 
of combinatoriality in human language. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences 377, 20200319 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0319. 30 
25. L. Raviv, A. Meyer, & S. Lev-Ari, Larger communities create more systematic languages. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 286, 20191262 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2019.1262. 
26. L. Raviv, A. Meyer, & S. Lev-Ari, The Role of Social Network Structure in the Emergence 
of Linguistic Structure. Cognitive Science 44, e12876 (2020). 35 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12876. 

PAGE 18
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
18 
 
27. K. Smith, How Culture and Biology Interact to Shape Language and the Language Faculty. 
Topics in Cognitive Science 12, 690–712 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12377. 
28. P. J. Richerson & R. Boyd, A dual inheritance model of the human evolutionary process I: 
Basic postulates and a simple model. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 1, 127–
154 (1978). 5 
29. C. J. Lumsden & E. O. Wilson, Genes, Mind, And Culture - The Coevolutionary Process 
(Harvard University Press, 1981). 
30. S. Kirby, M. Dowman, & T. L. Griffiths, Innateness and culture in the evolution of 
language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 5241–5245 (2007). 
31. T. L. Griffiths & M. L. Kalish, Language Evolution by Iterated Learning With Bayesian 10 
Agents. Cognitive Science 31, 441–480 (2007). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15326900701326576. 
32. S. Kirby, M. Tamariz, H. Cornish, & K. Smith, Compression and communication in the 
cultural evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition 141, 87–102 (2015). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016. 15 
33. B. Thompson, S. Kirby, & K. Smith, Culture shapes the evolution of cognition. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 4530–4535 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1523631113. 
34. G. E. Hinton & S. J. Nowlan, How Learning Can Guide Evolution. Complex Systems I, 
495–502 (1987). 20 
35. P. Hagoort, The core and beyond in the language-ready brain. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews 81, 194–204 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.048. 
36. P. Hagoort & A. Özyürek, Extending the Architecture of Language From a Multimodal 
Perspective. Topics in Cognitive Science (2024). https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12728. 25 
37. V. M. Janik & P. J. Slater, The different roles of social learning in vocal communication. 
Animal Behaviour 60, 1–11 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1006/anbe.2000.1410. 
38. S. C. Vernes, V. M. Janik, W. T. Fitch, & P. J. B. Slater, Vocal learning in animals and 
humans. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological 
Sciences 376, 20200234 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0234. 30 
39. W. T. Fitch, "The Biology and Evolution of Language: “Deep Homology” and the 
Evolution of Innovation" in Cognitive Neuroscience, Michael Gazzaniga, (The MIT Press, 
2009), pp. 873–883. 
40. C. Scharff & J. Petri, Evo-devo, deep homology and FoxP2: implications for the evolution 
of speech and language. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series 35 
B, Biological Sciences 366, 2124–2140 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0001. 

PAGE 19
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
19 
 
41. N. Shubin, C. Tabin, & S. Carroll, Deep homology and the origins of evolutionary novelty. 
Nature 457, 818–823 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07891. 
42. J. den Hoed & S. E. Fisher, Genetic pathways involved in human speech disorders. Current 
opinion in genetics & development 65, 103–111 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2020.05.012. 5 
43. S. E. Fisher, C. S. L. Lai, & A. P. Monaco, Deciphering the genetic basis of speech and 
language disorders. Annual review of neuroscience 26, 57–80 (2003). 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131144. 
44. C. S. Lai, S. E. Fisher, J. A. Hurst, F. Vargha-Khadem, & A. P. Monaco, A forkhead-
domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder. Nature 413, 519–523 10 
(2001). https://doi.org/10.1038/35097076. 
45. L. D. Morison, E. Meffert, M. Stampfer, I. Steiner-Wilke, B. Vollmer, K. Schulze, T. 
Briggs, R. Braden, A. Vogel, D. Thompson-Lake, C. Patel, E. Blair, H. Goel, S. Turner, 
U. Moog, A. Riess, F. Liegeois, D. A. Koolen, D. J. Amor, T. Kleefstra, S. E. Fisher, C. 
Zweier, & A. T. Morgan, In-depth characterisation of a cohort of individuals with 15 
missense and loss-of-function variants disrupting FOXP2. Journal of medical genetics 60, 
597–607 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2022-108734. 
46. P. Deriziotis & S. E. Fisher, Speech and Language: Translating the Genome. Trends in 
genetics: TIG 33, 642–656 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2017.07.002. 
47. E. G. Atkinson, A. J. Audesse, J. A. Palacios, D. M. Bobo, A. E. Webb, S. Ramachandran, 20 
& B. M. Henn, No Evidence for Recent Selection at FOXP2 among Diverse Human 
Populations. Cell 174, 1424-1435.e15 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.048. 
48. G. Alagöz, B. Molz, E. Eising, D. Schijven, C. Francks, J. L. Stein, & S. E. Fisher, Using 
neuroimaging genomics to investigate the evolution of human brain structure. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 119, e2200638119 25 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200638119. 
49. E. Eising, A. Carrion-Castillo, A. Vino, E. A. Strand, K. J. Jakielski, T. S. Scerri, M. S. 
Hildebrand, R. Webster, A. Ma, B. Mazoyer, C. Francks, M. Bahlo, I. E. Scheffer, A. T. 
Morgan, L. D. Shriberg, & S. E. Fisher, A set of regulatory genes co-expressed in 
embryonic human brain is implicated in disrupted speech development. Molecular 30 
Psychiatry 24, 1065–1078 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-018-0020-x. 
50. E. Eising, N. Mirza-Schreiber, E. L. de Zeeuw, C. A. Wang, D. T. Truong, A. G. Allegrini, 
C. Y. Shapland, G. Zhu, K. G. Wigg, M. L. Gerritse, B. Molz, G. Alagöz, A. Gialluisi, F. 
Abbondanza, K. Rimfeld, M. van Donkelaar, Z. Liao, P. R. Jansen, T. F. M. Andlauer, T. 
C. Bates, M. Bernard, K. Blokland, M. Bonte, A. D. Børglum, T. Bourgeron, D. Brandeis, 35 
F. Ceroni, V. Csépe, P. S. Dale, P. F. de Jong, J. C. DeFries, J.-F. Démonet, D. Demontis, 
Y. Feng, S. D. Gordon, S. L. Guger, M. E. Hayiou-Thomas, J. A. Hernández-Cabrera, J.-J. 
Hottenga, C. Hulme, J. Kere, E. N. Kerr, T. Koomar, K. Landerl, G. T. Leonard, M. W. 
Lovett, H. Lyytinen, N. G. Martin, A. Martinelli, U. Maurer, J. J. Michaelson, K. Moll, A. 
P. Monaco, A. T. Morgan, M. M. Nöthen, Z. Pausova, C. E. Pennell, B. F. Pennington, K. 40 

PAGE 20
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
20 
 
M. Price, V. M. Rajagopal, F. Ramus, L. Richer, N. H. Simpson, S. D. Smith, M. J. 
Snowling, J. Stein, L. J. Strug, J. B. Talcott, H. Tiemeier, M. P. van der Schroeff, E. 
Verhoef, K. E. Watkins, M. Wilkinson, M. J. Wright, C. L. Barr, D. I. Boomsma, M. 
Carreiras, M.-C. J. Franken, J. R. Gruen, M. Luciano, B. Müller-Myhsok, D. F. Newbury, 
R. K. Olson, S. Paracchini, T. Paus, R. Plomin, S. Reilly, G. Schulte-Körne, J. B. 5 
Tomblin, E. van Bergen, A. J. O. Whitehouse, E. G. Willcutt, B. St Pourcain, C. Francks, 
& S. E. Fisher, Genome-wide analyses of individual differences in quantitatively assessed 
reading- and language-related skills in up to 34,000 people. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 119, e2202764119 (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2202764119. 10 
51. J. Uddén, A. Hultén, K. Bendtz, Z. Mineroff, K. S. Kucera, A. Vino, E. Fedorenko, P. 
Hagoort, & S. E. Fisher, Toward Robust Functional Neuroimaging Genetics of Cognition. 
The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 39, 
8778–8787 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0888-19.2019. 
52. Z. Sha, D. Schijven, S. E. Fisher, & C. Francks, Genetic architecture of the white matter 15 
connectome of the human brain. Science Advances 9, eadd2870 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.add2870. 
53. Y. Mekki, V. Guillemot, H. Lemaître, A. Carrión-Castillo, S. Forkel, V. Frouin, & C. 
Philippe, The genetic architecture of language functional connectivity. NeuroImage 249, 
118795 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118795. 20 
54. S. E. Fisher & C. Scharff, FOXP2 as a molecular window into speech and language. Trends 
in genetics: TIG 25, 166–177 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2009.03.002. 
55. J. Krause, C. Lalueza-Fox, L. Orlando, W. Enard, R. E. Green, H. A. Burbano, J.-J. Hublin, 
C. Hänni, J. Fortea, M. de la Rasilla, J. Bertranpetit, A. Rosas, & S. Pääbo, The derived 
FOXP2 variant of modern humans was shared with Neandertals. Current biology: CB 17, 25 
1908–1912 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.10.008. 
56. M. Groszer, D. A. Keays, R. M. J. Deacon, J. P. De Bono, S. Prasad-Mulcare, S. Gaub, M. 
G. Baum, C. A. French, J. Nicod, J. A. Coventry, W. Enard, M. Fray, S. D. M. Brown, P. 
M. Nolan, S. Pääbo, K. M. Channon, R. M. Costa, J. Eilers, G. Ehret, J. N. P. Rawlins, & 
S. E. Fisher, Impaired Synaptic Plasticity and Motor Learning in Mice with a Point 30 
Mutation Implicated in Human Speech Deficits. Current Biology 18, 354–362 (2008). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.060. 
57. C. A. French, X. Jin, T. G. Campbell, E. Gerfen, M. Groszer, S. E. Fisher, & R. M. Costa, 
An aetiological Foxp2 mutation causes aberrant striatal activity and alters plasticity during 
skill learning. Molecular Psychiatry 17, 1077–1085 (2012). 35 
https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2011.105. 
58. H.-Y. Kuo, S.-Y. Chen, R.-C. Huang, H. Takahashi, Y.-H. Lee, H.-Y. Pang, C.-H. Wu, A. 
M. Graybiel, & F.-C. Liu, Speech- and language-linked FOXP2 mutation targets protein 
motors in striatal neurons. Brain 146, 3542–3557 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad090. 40 

PAGE 21
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
21 
 
59. M. Druart, M. Groszer, & C. L. Magueresse, An Etiological Foxp2 Mutation Impairs 
Neuronal Gain in Layer VI Cortico-Thalamic Cells through Increased GABAB/GIRK 
Signaling. Journal of Neuroscience 40, 8543–8555 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2615-19.2020. 
60. S. Haesler, C. Rochefort, B. Georgi, P. Licznerski, P. Osten, & C. Scharff, Incomplete and 5 
inaccurate vocal imitation after knockdown of FoxP2 in songbird basal ganglia nucleus 
Area X. PLoS biology 5, e321 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0050321. 
61. P. Norton, P. Barschke, C. Scharff, & E. Mendoza, Differential Song Deficits after 
Lentivirus-Mediated Knockdown of FoxP1, FoxP2, or FoxP4 in Area X of Juvenile Zebra 
Finches. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for 10 
Neuroscience 39, 9782–9796 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1250-19.2019. 
62. L. Xiao, D. P. Merullo, T. M. I. Koch, M. Cao, M. Co, A. Kulkarni, G. Konopka, & T. F. 
Roberts, Expression of FoxP2 in the basal ganglia regulates vocal motor sequences in the 
adult songbird. Nature communications 12, (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-
22918-2. 15 
63. W. Enard, The Molecular Basis of Human Brain Evolution. Current biology: CB 26, 
R1109–R1117 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.09.030. 
64. K. Hammerschmidt, C. Schreiweis, C. Minge, S. Pääbo, J. Fischer, & W. Enard, A 
humanized version of Foxp2 does not affect ultrasonic vocalization in adult mice. Genes, 
Brain and Behavior 14, 583–590 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1111/gbb.12237. 20 
65. S. von Merten, C. Pfeifle, S. Künzel, S. Hoier, & D. Tautz, A humanized version of Foxp2 
affects ultrasonic vocalization in adult female and male mice. Genes, Brain and Behavior 
20, e12764 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1111/gbb.12764. 
66. C. Schreiweis, U. Bornschein, E. Burguière, C. Kerimoglu, S. Schreiter, M. Dannemann, S. 
Goyal, E. Rea, C. A. French, R. Puliyadi, M. Groszer, S. E. Fisher, R. Mundry, C. Winter, 25 
W. Hevers, S. Pääbo, W. Enard, & A. M. Graybiel, Humanized Foxp2 accelerates learning 
by enhancing transitions from declarative to procedural performance. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 111, 14253–14258 (2014). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1414542111. 
67. S. E. Fisher, Evolution of language: Lessons from the genome. Psychonomic Bulletin & 30 
Review 24, 34–40 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-016-1112-8. 
68. C. A. French & S. E. Fisher, What can mice tell us about Foxp2 function?. Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology 28, 72–79 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.07.003. 
69. S. Wohlgemuth, I. Adam, & C. Scharff, FoxP2 in songbirds. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 28, 86–93 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.06.009. 35 
70. V. M. Janik & M. Knörnschild, Vocal production learning in mammals revisited. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 376, 20200244 
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0244. 

PAGE 22
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
22 
 
71. M. E. Wirthlin, T. A. Schmid, J. E. Elie, X. Zhang, A. Kowalczyk, R. Redlich, V. A. 
Shvareva, A. Rakuljic, M. B. Ji, N. S. Bhat, I. M. Kaplow, D. E. Schäffer, A. J. Lawler, A. 
Z. Wang, B. N. Phan, S. Annaldasula, A. R. Brown, T. Lu, B. K. Lim, E. Azim, Zoonomia 
Consortium, N. L. Clark, W. K. Meyer, S. L. K. Pond, M. Chikina, M. M. Yartsev, A. R. 
Pfenning, G. Andrews, J. C. Armstrong, M. Bianchi, B. W. Birren, K. R. Bredemeyer, A. 5 
M. Breit, M. J. Christmas, H. Clawson, J. Damas, F. Di Palma, M. Diekhans, M. X. Dong, 
E. Eizirik, K. Fan, C. Fanter, N. M. Foley, K. Forsberg-Nilsson, C. J. Garcia, J. Gatesy, S. 
Gazal, D. P. Genereux, L. Goodman, J. Grimshaw, M. K. Halsey, A. J. Harris, G. Hickey, 
M. Hiller, A. G. Hindle, R. M. Hubley, G. M. Hughes, J. Johnson, D. Juan, I. M. Kaplow, 
E. K. Karlsson, K. C. Keough, B. Kirilenko, K.-P. Koepfli, J. M. Korstian, A. Kowalczyk, 10 
S. V. Kozyrev, A. J. Lawler, C. Lawless, T. Lehmann, D. L. Levesque, H. A. Lewin, X. 
Li, A. Lind, K. Lindblad-Toh, A. Mackay-Smith, V. D. Marinescu, T. Marques-Bonet, V. 
C. Mason, J. R. S. Meadows, W. K. Meyer, J. E. Moore, L. R. Moreira, D. D. Moreno-
Santillan, K. M. Morrill, G. Muntané, W. J. Murphy, A. Navarro, M. Nweeia, S. Ortmann, 
A. Osmanski, B. Paten, N. S. Paulat, A. R. Pfenning, B. N. Phan, K. S. Pollard, H. E. 15 
Pratt, D. A. Ray, S. K. Reilly, J. R. Rosen, I. Ruf, L. Ryan, O. A. Ryder, P. C. Sabeti, D. 
E. Schäffer, A. Serres, B. Shapiro, A. F. A. Smit, M. Springer, C. Srinivasan, C. Steiner, J. 
M. Storer, K. A. M. Sullivan, P. F. Sullivan, E. Sundström, M. A. Supple, R. Swofford, J.-
E. Talbot, E. Teeling, J. Turner-Maier, A. Valenzuela, F. Wagner, O. Wallerman, C. 
Wang, J. Wang, Z. Weng, A. P. Wilder, M. E. Wirthlin, J. R. Xue, & X. Zhang, Vocal 20 
learning–associated convergent evolution in mammalian proteins and regulatory elements. 
Science 383, eabn3263 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn3263. 
72. V. Slon, F. Mafessoni, B. Vernot, C. de Filippo, S. Grote, B. Viola, M. Hajdinjak, S. 
Peyrégne, S. Nagel, S. Brown, K. Douka, T. Higham, M. B. Kozlikin, M. V. Shunkov, A. 
P. Derevianko, J. Kelso, M. Meyer, K. Prüfer, & S. Pääbo, The genome of the offspring of 25 
a Neanderthal mother and a Denisovan father. Nature 561, 113–116 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0455-x. 
73. F. Mafessoni, S. Grote, C. de Filippo, V. Slon, K. A. Kolobova, B. Viola, S. V. Markin, M. 
Chintalapati, S. Peyrégne, L. Skov, P. Skoglund, A. I. Krivoshapkin, A. P. Derevianko, M. 
Meyer, J. Kelso, B. Peter, K. Prüfer, & S. Pääbo, A high-coverage Neandertal genome 30 
from Chagyrskaya Cave. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 117, 15132–15136 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004944117. 
74. T. Higham, K. Douka, R. Wood, C. B. Ramsey, F. Brock, L. Basell, M. Camps, A. 
Arrizabalaga, J. Baena, C. Barroso-Ruíz, C. Bergman, C. Boitard, P. Boscato, M. 
Caparrós, N. J. Conard, C. Draily, A. Froment, B. Galván, P. Gambassini, A. Garcia-35 
Moreno, S. Grimaldi, P. Haesaerts, B. Holt, M.-J. Iriarte-Chiapusso, A. Jelinek, J. F. Jordá 
Pardo, J.-M. Maíllo-Fernández, A. Marom, J. Maroto, M. Menéndez, L. Metz, E. Morin, 
A. Moroni, F. Negrino, E. Panagopoulou, M. Peresani, S. Pirson, M. de la Rasilla, J. Riel-
Salvatore, A. Ronchitelli, D. Santamaria, P. Semal, L. Slimak, J. Soler, N. Soler, A. 
Villaluenga, R. Pinhasi, & R. Jacobi, The timing and spatiotemporal patterning of 40 
Neanderthal disappearance. Nature 512, 306–309 (2014). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13621. 

PAGE 23
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
23 
 
75. M. Kuhlwilm & C. Boeckx, A catalog of single nucleotide changes distinguishing modern 
humans from archaic hominins. Scientific Reports 9, 8463 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-44877-x. 
76. Z. N. Kronenberg, I. T. Fiddes, D. Gordon, S. Murali, S. Cantsilieris, O. S. Meyerson, J. G. 
Underwood, B. J. Nelson, M. J. P. Chaisson, M. L. Dougherty, K. M. Munson, A. R. 5 
Hastie, M. Diekhans, F. Hormozdiari, N. Lorusso, K. Hoekzema, R. Qiu, K. Clark, A. 
Raja, A. E. Welch, M. Sorensen, C. Baker, R. S. Fulton, J. Armstrong, T. A. Graves-
Lindsay, A. M. Denli, E. R. Hoppe, P. Hsieh, C. M. Hill, A. W. C. Pang, J. Lee, E. T. 
Lam, S. K. Dutcher, F. H. Gage, W. C. Warren, J. Shendure, D. Haussler, V. A. 
Schneider, H. Cao, M. Ventura, R. K. Wilson, B. Paten, A. Pollen, & E. E. Eichler, High-10 
resolution comparative analysis of great ape genomes. Science (New York, N.Y.) 360, 
eaar6343 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aar6343. 
77. S. E. Fisher, Human Genetics: The Evolving Story of FOXP2. Current biology: CB 29, 
R65–R67 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.11.047. 
78. S. B. Carroll, Evolution at two levels: on genes and form. PLoS biology 3, e245 (2005). 15 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0030245. 
79. M. C. King & A. C. Wilson, Evolution at two levels in humans and chimpanzees. Science 
(New York, N.Y.) 188, 107–116 (1975). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1090005. 
80. S. Ma, M. Skarica, Q. Li, C. Xu, R. D. Risgaard, A. T. N. Tebbenkamp, X. Mato-Blanco, R. 
Kovner, Ž. Krsnik, X. De Martin, V. Luria, X. Martí-Pérez, D. Liang, A. Karger, D. K. 20 
Schmidt, Z. Gomez-Sanchez, C. Qi, K. T. Gobeske, S. Pochareddy, A. Debnath, C. J. 
Hottman, J. Spurrier, L. Teo, A. G. Boghdadi, J. Homman-Ludiye, J. J. Ely, E. W. Daadi, 
D. Mi, M. Daadi, O. Marín, P. R. Hof, M.-R. Rasin, J. Bourne, C. C. Sherwood, G. 
Santpere, M. J. Girgenti, S. M. Strittmatter, A. M. M. Sousa, & N. Sestan, Molecular and 
cellular evolution of the primate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Science 377, (2022). 25 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abo7257. 
81. D. Gokhman, E. Lavi, K. Prüfer, M. F. Fraga, J. A. Riancho, J. Kelso, S. Pääbo, E. 
Meshorer, & L. Carmel, Reconstructing the DNA methylation maps of the Neandertal and 
the Denisovan. Science (New York, N.Y.) 344, 523–527 (2014). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1250368. 30 
82. D. Gokhman, M. Nissim-Rafinia, L. Agranat-Tamir, G. Housman, R. García-Pérez, E. 
Lizano, O. Cheronet, S. Mallick, M. A. Nieves-Colón, H. Li, S. Alpaslan-Roodenberg, M. 
Novak, H. Gu, J. M. Osinski, M. Ferrando-Bernal, P. Gelabert, I. Lipende, D. Mjungu, I. 
Kondova, R. Bontrop, O. Kullmer, G. Weber, T. Shahar, M. Dvir-Ginzberg, M. Faerman, 
E. E. Quillen, A. Meissner, Y. Lahav, L. Kandel, M. Liebergall, M. E. Prada, J. M. Vidal, 35 
R. M. Gronostajski, A. C. Stone, B. Yakir, C. Lalueza-Fox, R. Pinhasi, D. Reich, T. 
Marques-Bonet, E. Meshorer, & L. Carmel, Differential DNA methylation of vocal and 
facial anatomy genes in modern humans. Nature Communications 11, 1189 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15020-6. 
83. P. Marler, Birdsong and Speech Development: Could There Be Parallels?. American 40 
Scientist 669–693 (1970). 

PAGE 24
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
24 
 
84. I. Pepperberg, K. J. Brese, & B. J. Harris, Solitary sound play during acquisition of English 
vocalizations by an African Grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus): Possible parallels with 
children’s monologue speech. Applied Psycholinguistics 12, 151–178 (1991). 
85. A. A. Fernandez, L. S. Burchardt, M. Nagy, & M. Knörnschild, Babbling in a vocal 
learning bat resembles human infant babbling. Science (New York, N.Y.) 373, 923–926 5 
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf9279. 
86. M. Knörnschild, O. Behr, & O. von Helversen, Babbling behavior in the sac-winged bat 
(Saccopteryx bilineata). Die Naturwissenschaften 93, 451–454 (2006). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00114-006-0127-9. 
87. L. A. Petitto & P. F. Marentette, Babbling in the manual mode: evidence for the ontogeny 10 
of language. Science (New York, N.Y.) 251, 1493–1496 (1991). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2006424. 
88. L. A. Petitto, S. Holowka, L. E. Sergio, B. Levy, & D. J. Ostry, Baby hands that move to 
the rhythm of language: hearing babies acquiring sign languages babble silently on the 
hands. Cognition 93, 43–73 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.007. 15 
89. D. K. Oller, R. E. Eilers, D. H. Bull, & A. E. Carney, Prespeech Vocalizations of a Deaf 
Infant. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 28, 47–63 (1985). 
https://doi.org/10.1044/jshr.2801.47. 
90. R. Dooling & M. Searcy, Early perceptual selectivity in the swamp sparrow. Developmental 
Psychobiology 13, (1980). 20 
91. P. Adret, Operant conditioning, song learning and imprinting to taped song in the zebra 
finch. Animal Behaviour 46, 149–159 (1993). 
92. L. V. Riters, J. A. Spool, D. P. Merullo, & A. H. Hahn, Song practice as a rewarding form 
of play in songbirds. Behavioural Processes 163, 91–98 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2017.10.002. 25 
93. M. G. Kearney, T. L. Warren, E. Hisey, J. Qi, & R. Mooney, Discrete evaluative and 
premotor circuits enable vocal learning in songbirds. Neuron 104, 559–575 (2019). 
94. Y. Kim, S. Kwon, R. Rajan, C. Mori, & S. Kojima, Intrinsic motivation for singing in 
songbirds is enhanced by temporary singing suppression and regulated by dopamine. 
Scientific Reports 11, 20350 (2021). 30 
95. E. Hisey, M. G. Kearney, & R. Mooney, A common neural circuit mechanism for internally 
guided and externally reinforced forms of motor learning. Nature Neuroscience 21, 589–
597 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0092-6. 
96. M. Tanaka, F. Sun, Y. Li, & R. Mooney, A mesocortical dopamine circuit enables the 
cultural transmission of vocal behaviour. Nature 563, 117–120 (2018). 35 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0636-7. 

PAGE 25
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
25 
 
97. E. Fedorenko, A. A. Ivanova, & T. I. Regev, The language network as a natural kind within 
the broader landscape of the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 25, 289–312 
(2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-024-00802-4. 
98. J. Sierpowska, K. L. Bryant, N. Janssen, G. Blazquez Freches, M. Römkens, M. Mangnus, 
R. B. Mars, & V. Piai, Comparing human and chimpanzee temporal lobe neuroanatomy 5 
reveals modifications to human language hubs beyond the frontotemporal arcuate 
fasciculus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, e2118295119 (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2118295119. 
99. G. Gallardo, C. Eichner, C. C. Sherwood, W. D. Hopkins, A. Anwander, & A. D. 
Friederici, Morphological evolution of language-relevant brain areas. PLOS Biology 21, 10 
e3002266 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002266. 
100. A. D. Friederici, R. M. Wittig, A. Anwander, C. Eichner, T. Gräßle, C. Jäger, E. Kirilina, I. 
Lipp, A. Düx, L. J. Edwards, C. Girard-Buttoz, A. Jauch, K. S. Kopp, M. Paquette, K. J. 
Pine, S. Unwin, D. B. M. Haun, F. H. Leendertz, R. McElreath, M. Morawski, P. Gunz, N. 
Weiskopf, C. Crockford, EBC Consortium, D. Ashoff, K. Albig, B. Amarasekaran, S. 15 
Angedakin, A. Anwander, C. Asiimwe, C. Bock, B. Blazey, A. Bernhard, J. C. Beehner, 
L. Bailanda, R. Belais, T. J. Bergman, D. Böttcher, T. Bortolato, P. Carlier, J. Chantrey, C. 
Crockford, D. Denk, T. Deschner, A. Düx, L. J. Edwards, C. Eichner, D. Encke, G. 
Escoubas, M. Ettaj, P. Fedurek, K. Flores, A. Romero Florero, R. Franke, A. D. Friederici, 
C. Girard-Buttoz, J. Gomez Fortun, T. Gräßle, E. Gruber-Dujardin, P. Gunz, S. 20 
Hambrecht, F. Hansmann, J. Hartel, D. B. Haun, M. Henshall, C. Hobaiter, N. Hofman, J. 
E. Jaffe, C. Jäger, A. Jauch, S. Karhemere, E. Kirilina, R. Klopfleisch, T. Knauf-Witzens, 
K. Kopp, B. Lange, K. E. Langergraber, A. Lawrenz, K. Lee, F. H. Leendertz, I. Lipp, M. 
Liptovszky, C. Patricia Lumbu, P. Makouloutou Nzassi, G. Landry Mamboundou 
Kouima, K. Mätz-Rensing, R. McElreath, Z. Mezö, F. Minesi, S. Moittie, T. Møller, M. 25 
Morawski, D. Morgan, M. Müller, T. Mugabe, M. Muller, K. Olofsson-Sannö, A. Ondzie, 
E. Otali, M. Paquette, S. Pika, K. J. Pine, A. Pizarro, K. Pleh, S. Reichler-Danielowski, J. 
Rendel, M. M. Robbins, K. Ruske, L. Samuni, C. Sanz, J. Schinköthe, A. Schüle, I. 
Schwabe, K. Schwalm, A. Sebastiampillai, L. Southern, S. Speede, J. Steiner, M. F. 
Stidworthy, M. Surbeck, C. A. Szentiks, T. Tanga, T. Loubser Theron, R. Ulrich, S. 30 
Unwin, E. van de Waal, S. Walker, N. Weiskopf, G. Wibbelt, N. Widulin, H. Will, R. M 
Wittig, K. Wood, E. Zaccarella, & K. Zuberbühler, Brain structure and function: a 
multidisciplinary pipeline to study hominoid brain evolution. Frontiers in Integrative 
Neuroscience 17, (2024). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2023.1299087. 
101. S. Kirby, Spontaneous evolution of linguistic structure-an iterated learning model of the 35 
emergence of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 
5, 102–110 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.918430. 
102. C. Kemp, Y. Xu, & T. Regier, Semantic Typology and Efficient Communication. Annual 
Review of Linguistics 4, 109–128 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-
011817-045406. 40 

PAGE 26
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
26 
 
103. E. Gibson, R. Futrell, S. P. Piantadosi, I. Dautriche, K. Mahowald, L. Bergen, & R. Levy, 
How Efficiency Shapes Human Language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23, 389–407 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.02.003. 
104. K. Smith, How Language Learning and Language Use Create Linguistic Structure. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science 31, 177–186 (2022). 5 
https://doi.org/10.1177/09637214211068127. 
105. B. De Boer, W. Sandler, & S. Kirby, New perspectives on duality of patterning: 
Introduction to the special issue. Language and Cognition 4, 251–259 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1515/langcog-2012-0014. 
106. T. Verhoef, S. Kirby, & B. de Boer, Emergence of combinatorial structure and economy 10 
through iterated learning with continuous acoustic signals. Journal of Phonetics 43, 57–68 
(2014). 
107. H. Little, K. Eryılmaz, & B. de Boer, Signal dimensionality and the emergence of 
combinatorial structure. Cognition 168, 1–15 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.06.011. 15 
108. G. Roberts, J. Lewandowski, & B. Galantucci, How communication changes when we 
cannot mime the world: Experimental evidence for the effect of iconicity on 
combinatoriality. Cognition 141, 52–66 (2015). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.04.001. 
109. W. Sandler, C. Padden, & M. Aronoff, Emerging Sign Languages. Languages 7, (2022). 20 
https://doi.org/10.3390/languages7040284. 
110. T. C. Scott-Phillips & S. Kirby, Language evolution in the laboratory. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 14, 411–417 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.06.006. 
111. M. Tamariz, Experimental Studies on the Cultural Evolution of Language. Annual Review 
of Linguistics 3, 389–407 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-011516-25 
033807. 
112. S. Goldin-Meadow & C. Mylander, Spontaneous sign systems created by deaf children in 
two cultures. Nature 391, 279–281 (1998). https://doi.org/10.1038/34646. 
113. A. Senghas, S. Kita, & A. Özyürek, Children Creating Core Properties of Language: 
Evidence from an Emerging Sign Language in Nicaragua. Science 305, 1779–1782 30 
(2004). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1100199. 
114. S. Goldin-Meadow, D. Brentari, M. Coppola, L. Horton, & A. Senghas, Watching language 
grow in the manual modality: Nominals, predicates, and handshapes. Cognition 136, 381–
395 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.11.029. 
115. D. Hunsicker & S. Goldin-Meadow, Hierarchical structure in a self-created communication 35 
system: Building nominal constituents in homesign. Language 88, 732–763 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.2012.0092. 

PAGE 27
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
27 
 
116. A. Senghas, A. Özyürek, & S. Goldin-Meadow, "Homesign as a way-station between co-
speech gesture and sign language: the evolution of segmenting and sequencing" in Evol. 
Emergence Lang. Evid. Inference, R. Botha, & M. Everaert,eds. (OUP Oxford, 2013), pp. 
62–76. 
117. S. Goldin-Meadow, W. C. So, A. Özyürek, & C. Mylander, The natural order of events: 5 
How speakers of different languages represent events nonverbally. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 105, 9163–9168 (2008). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0710060105. 
118. Ş. Özçalışkan, C. Lucero, & S. Goldin-Meadow, Does language shape silent gesture?. 
Cognition 148, 10–18 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.12.001. 10 
119. Y. Motamedi, M. Schouwstra, & S. Kirby, An evolutionary approach to sign language 
emergence: From state to process. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 40, e65 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X15003003. 
120. J. Winters, S. Kirby, & K. Smith, Contextual predictability shapes signal autonomy. 
Cognition 176, 15–30 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.002. 15 
121. S. Kirby, Y. Motamedi, L. Wolters, & K. Smith, Compositionality Arises From Iterated 
Learning Despite a Preference for Holistic Signals: An Experimental Model of Sign 
Language Emergence. Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Language Evolution 
(JCoLE) 402–404 (2022). 
122. J. Nölle, M. Staib, R. Fusaroli, & K. Tylén, The emergence of systematicity: How 20 
environmental and communicative factors shape a novel communication system. 
Cognition 181, 93–104 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.08.014. 
123. R. Selten & M. Warglien, The emergence of simple languages in an experimental 
coordination game. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 7361–7366 
(2007). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0702077104. 25 
124. A. Wray, Protolanguage as a holistic system for social interaction. Language & 
Communication 18, 47–67 (1998). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0271-5309(97)00033-5. 
125. S. Kirby, "Syntax without natural selection: How compositionality emerges from 
vocabulary in a population of learners." in Evol. Emergence Lang. Soc. Funct. Orig. 
Linguist. Form, (2000), pp. 303–323. 30 
126. I. Arnon, The Starting Big approach to language learning. Journal of Child Language 48, 
937–958 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000921000386. 
127. I. Arnon & N. Snider, More than words: Frequency effects for multi-word phrases. Journal 
of Memory and Language 62, 67–82 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2009.09.005. 
128. S. Goldin-Meadow, C. Mylander, & C. Butcher, The resilience of combinatorial structure at 35 
the word level: morphology in self-styled gesture systems. Cognition 56, 195–262 (1995). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(95)00662-I. 

PAGE 28
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
28 
 
129. S. Goldin-Meadow & I. Arnon, Whole-to-part development in language creation. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 29, 12–14 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2024.09.015. 
130. B. Skarabela, M. Ota, R. O’Connor, & I. Arnon, ‘Clap your hands’ or ‘take your hands’? 
One-year-olds distinguish between frequent and infrequent multiword phrases. Cognition 
211, 104612 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104612. 5 
131. I. Arnon & M. Ramscar, Granularity and the acquisition of grammatical gender: How 
order-of-acquisition affects what gets learned. Cognition 122, 292–305 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.10.009. 
132. N. Siegelman & I. Arnon, The advantage of starting big: Learning from unsegmented input 
facilitates mastery of grammatical gender in an artificial language. Journal of Memory and 10 
Language 85, 60–75 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2015.07.003. 
133. E. Ochs, "Transcription as theory." in Dev. Pragmat., E. Ochs, & B. Schieffelin,eds. (New 
York: Academic Press, 1979), pp. 43–72. 
134. A. M. Peters, The Units of Language Acquisition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1983). 15 
135. S. Goldin-Meadow, The resilience of language:  What gesture creation in deaf children can 
tell us about how all children learn language. (New York: Psychology Press., 2003). 
136. S. Goldin-Meadow, C. Mylander, & A. Franklin, How children make language out of 
gesture: Morphological structure in gesture systems developed by American and Chinese 
deaf children. Cognitive Psychology 55, 87–135 (2007). 20 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2006.08.001. 
137. C. Grund, G. Badihi, K. E. Graham, A. Safryghin, & C. Hobaiter, GesturalOrigins: A 
bottom-up framework for establishing systematic gesture data across ape species. 
Behavior Research Methods 56, 986–1001 (2024). https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-023-
02082-9. 25 
138. Y. Prat, Animals Have No Language, and Humans Are Animals Too. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science 14, 885–893 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619858402. 
139. D. L. Cheney & R. M. Seyfarth, Baboon Metaphysics: The Evolution of a Social Mind 
(University of Chicago Press, 2008). https://doi.org/10.7208/9780226102429. 
140. J. R. Saffran, R. N. Aslin, & E. L. Newport, Statistical Learning by 8-Month-Old Infants. 30 
Science 274, 1926–1928 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.274.5294.1926. 
141. I. Arnon, S. Kirby, J. A. Allen, C. Garrigue, E. L. Carroll, & E. C. Garland, Whale song 
shows language-like statistical structure. Science 387, 649–653 (2025). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adq7055. 
142. Y. Yovel & O. Rechavi, AI and the Doctor Dolittle challenge. Current Biology 33, R783–35 
R787 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2023.06.063. 

PAGE 29
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
29 
 
143. C. Rutz, M. Bronstein, A. Raskin, S. C. Vernes, K. Zacarian, & D. E. Blasi, Using machine 
learning to decode animal communication. Science 381, 152–155 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adg7314. 
144. C. Hobaiter, K. E. Graham, & R. W. Byrne, Are ape gestures like words? Outstanding 
issues in detecting similarities and differences between human language and ape gesture. 5 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 377, 20210301 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2021.0301. 
145. S. Kirby, T. Griffiths, & K. Smith, Iterated learning and the evolution of language. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology 28, 108–114 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.07.014. 
146. A. Cangelosi & D. Parisi, Simulating the Evolution of Language (Springer Science & 10 
Business Media, 2012). 
147. W. T. Fitch, Toward a computational framework for cognitive biology: Unifying 
approaches from cognitive neuroscience and comparative cognition. Physics of Life 
Reviews 11, 329–364 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2014.04.005. 
148. S. Ferrigno, S. J. Cheyette, S. T. Piantadosi, & J. F. Cantlon, Recursive sequence generation 15 
in monkeys, children, U.S. adults, and native Amazonians. Science Advances 6, eaaz1002 
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz1002. 
149. X. Jiang, T. Long, W. Cao, J. Li, S. Dehaene, & L. Wang, Production of Supra-regular 
Spatial Sequences by Macaque Monkeys. Current biology: CB 28, 1851-1859.e4 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.04.047. 20 
150. T. J. Bergman, J. C. Beehner, D. L. Cheney, & R. M. Seyfarth, Hierarchical Classification 
by Rank and Kinship in Baboons. Science 302, 1234–1236 (2003). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1087513. 
151. G. Schino, B. Tiddi, & E. P. Di Sorrentino, Simultaneous classification by rank and kinship 
in Japanese macaques. Animal Behaviour 71, 1069–1074 (2006). 25 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2005.07.019. 
152. O. Mascaro, N. Goupil, H. Pantecouteau, A. Depierreux, J.-B. Van der Henst, & N. 
Claidière, Human and animal dominance hierarchies show a pyramidal structure guiding 
adult and infant social inferences. Nature Human Behaviour 7, 1294–1306 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01634-5. 30 
153. A. D. Patel, Language, music, syntax and the brain. Nature Neuroscience 6, 674–681 
(2003). https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1082. 
154. E. C. Garland & P. K. McGregor, Cultural Transmission, Evolution, and Revolution in 
Vocal Displays: Insights From Bird and Whale Song. Frontiers in Psychology 11, (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.544929. 35 

PAGE 30
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
30 
 
155. M. de J. D. Martins, Z. Muršič, J. Oh, & W. T. Fitch, Representing visual recursion does 
not require verbal or motor resources. Cognitive Psychology 77, 20–41 (2015). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2015.01.004. 
156. G. Westphal-Fitch, B. Giustolisi, C. Cecchetto, J. S. Martin, & W. T. Fitch, Artificial 
Grammar Learning Capabilities in an Abstract Visual Task Match Requirements for 5 
Linguistic Syntax. Frontiers in Psychology 9, (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01210. 
157. J. Hyland Bruno, E. D. Jarvis, M. Liberman, & O. Tchernichovski, Birdsong Learning and 
Culture: Analogies with Human Spoken Language. Annual Review of Linguistics 7, 449–
472 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-090420-121034. 10 
158. H. Williams & R. F. Lachlan, Evidence for cumulative cultural evolution in bird song. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 377, 20200322 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0322. 
159. W. H. Thorpe, Bird-song: the biology of vocal communication and expression in birds. 
(1961). 15 
160. P. Marler, "The instinct to learn" in Epigenesis Mind Essays Biol. Cogn., (Psychology 
Press, 2014), pp. 37–66. 
161. O. Fehér, H. Wang, S. Saar, P. P. Mitra, & O. Tchernichovski, De novo establishment of 
wild-type song culture in the zebra finch. Nature 459, 564–568 (2009). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07994. 20 
162. O. Fehér, I. Ljubičić, K. Suzuki, K. Okanoya, & O. Tchernichovski, Statistical learning in 
songbirds: from self-tutoring to song culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 372, 20160053 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0053. 
163. C. I. Petkov & C. ten Cate, Structured Sequence Learning: Animal Abilities, Cognitive 25 
Operations, and Language Evolution. Topics in Cognitive Science 12, 828–842 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12444. 
164. C. Santolin & J. R. Saffran, Constraints on Statistical Learning Across Species. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 22, 52–63 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.10.003. 
165. B. Wilson, M. Spierings, A. Ravignani, J. L. Mueller, T. H. Mintz, F. Wijnen, A. van der 30 
Kant, K. Smith, & A. Rey, Non-adjacent Dependency Learning in Humans and Other 
Animals. Topics in Cognitive Science 12, 843–858 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12381. 
166. K. Zuberbühler, Combinatorial capacities in primates. Current Opinion in Behavioral 
Sciences 21, 161–169 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.03.015. 35 
167. C. Girard-Buttoz, E. Zaccarella, T. Bortolato, A. D. Friederici, R. M. Wittig, & C. 
Crockford, Chimpanzees produce diverse vocal sequences with ordered and 

PAGE 31
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
31 
 
recombinatorial properties. Communications Biology 5, 410 (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03350-8. 
168. Q. Gallot, C. Depriester, S. Moran, & K. Zuberbühler, A non-human primate combinatorial 
system for long-distance communication. iScience 27, (2024). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.111172. 5 
169. N. Claidière, K. Smith, S. Kirby, & J. Fagot, Cultural evolution of systematically structured 
behaviour in a non-human primate. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences 281, (2014). https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.1541. 
170. E. V. Clark, "Language is Acquired in Interaction" in Algebr. Struct. Nat. Lang., (CRC 
Press, 2022). 10 
171. M. Tomasello, The social bases of language acquisition. Social Development 1, 67–87 
(1992). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.1992.tb00135.x. 
172. S. R. Lytle & P. K. Kuhl, "Social Interaction and Language Acquisition" in Handbook 
Psycholinguist., (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017), pp. 615–634. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118829516.ch27. 15 
173. M. Babineau, R. Shi, & A. Christophe, 14-month-olds exploit verbs’ syntactic contexts to 
build expectations about novel words. Infancy 25, 719–733 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/infa.12354. 
174. J. Gervain & J. F. Werker, Prosody cues word order in 7-month-old bilingual infants. 
Nature Communications 4, 1490 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms2430. 20 
175. M. H. Goldstein, A. P. King, & M. J. West, Social interaction shapes babbling: Testing 
parallels between birdsong  and speech. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
100, 8030–8035 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1332441100. 
176. P. K. Kuhl, F.-M. Tsao, & H.-M. Liu, Foreign-language experience in infancy: Effects of 
short-term exposure and social interaction on phonetic learning. Proceedings of the 25 
National Academy of Sciences 100, 9096–9101 (2003). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1532872100. 
177. S. Goldin-Meadow, Thinking with Your Hands: The Surprising Science Behind How 
Gestures Shape Our Thoughts (Hachette UK, 2023). 
178. E. V. Clark, Conversational Repair and the Acquisition of Language. Discourse Processes 30 
57, 441–459 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853X.2020.1719795. 
179. W. T. Fitch, L. Huber, & T. Bugnyar, Social Cognition and the Evolution of Language: 
Constructing Cognitive Phylogenies. Neuron 65, 795–814 (2010). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.011. 

PAGE 32
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
32 
 
180. S. C. Levinson, "Interactional Foundations of Language: The Interaction Engine 
Hypothesis" in Hum. Lang., P. Hagoort,ed. (The MIT Press, 2019), pp. 189–200. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/10841.003.0018. 
181. D. I. Tsomokos & L. Raviv, A bidirectional association between language development and 
prosocial behavior in childhood: Evidence from a longitudinal birth cohort in the United 5 
Kingdom. Developmental Psychology (2024). https://doi.org/10.1037/dev0001875. 
182. R. Ensor, D. Spencer, & C. Hughes, ‘You Feel Sad?’ Emotion Understanding Mediates 
Effects of Verbal Ability and Mother–Child Mutuality on Prosocial Behaviors: Findings 
from 2 Years to 4 Years. Social Development 20, 93–110 (2011). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.2009.00572.x. 10 
183. E. Longobardi, P. Spataro, A. Frigerio, & L. Rescorla, Gender differences in the 
relationship between language and social competence in preschool children. Infant 
Behavior and Development 43, 1–4 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2016.03.001. 
184. E. Longobardi, P. Spataro, & C. Rossi-Arnaud, Direct and Indirect Associations of 
Empathy, Theory of Mind, and Language with Prosocial Behavior: Gender Differences in 15 
Primary School Children. The Journal of Genetic Psychology 180, 266–279 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00221325.2019.1653817. 
185. V. Ornaghi, A. Pepe, & I. Grazzani, False-Belief Understanding and Language Ability 
Mediate the Relationship between Emotion Comprehension and Prosocial Orientation in 
Preschoolers. Frontiers in Psychology 7, (2016). 20 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01534. 
186. M. Fujiki, B. Brinton, & C. M. Todd, Social Skills of Children With Specific Language 
Impairment. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools 27, 195–202 (1996). 
https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461.2703.195. 
187. N. P. van den Bedem, J. E. Dockrell, P. M. van Alphen, S. V. Kalicharan, & C. Rieffe, 25 
Victimization, Bullying, and Emotional Competence: Longitudinal Associations in 
(Pre)Adolescents With and Without Developmental Language Disorder. Journal of 
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 61, 2028–2044 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_JSLHR-L-17-0429. 
188. C. L. Forrest, J. L. Gibson, S. L. Halligan, & M. C. St Clair, A longitudinal analysis of early 30 
language difficulty and peer problems on later emotional difficulties in adolescence: 
Evidence from the Millennium Cohort Study. Autism & Developmental Language 
Impairments 3, 2396941518795392 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1177/2396941518795392. 
189. M. J. West & A. P. King, Female visual displays affect the development of male song in the 
cowbird. Nature 334, 244–246 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1038/334244a0. 35 
190. S. Carouso-Peck, O. Menyhart, T. J. DeVoogd, & M. H. Goldstein, Contingent parental 
responses are naturally associated with zebra finch song learning. Animal Behaviour 165, 
123–132 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2020.04.019. 

PAGE 33
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
33 
 
191. Y. Chen, L. E. Matheson, & J. T. Sakata, Mechanisms underlying the social enhancement 
of vocal learning in songbirds. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 113, 6641–6646 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1522306113. 
192. S. Yanagihara & Y. Yazaki-Sugiyama, Social interaction with a tutor modulates 5 
responsiveness of specific auditory neurons in juvenile zebra finches. Behavioural 
Processes 163, 32–36 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2018.04.003. 
193. P. M. Greenfield & E. S. Savage-Rumbaugh, Comparing communicative competence in 
child and chimp: the pragmatics of repetition. Journal of Child Language 20, 1–26 (1993). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000900009090. 10 
194. C. Yang, Ontogeny and phylogeny of language. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 110, 6324–6327 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1216803110. 
195. M. Takahasi & K. Okanoya, Song Learning in Wild and Domesticated Strains of White-
Rumped Munia, Lonchura striata, Compared by Cross-Fostering Procedures: 
Domestication Increases Song Variability by Decreasing Strain-Specific Bias. Ethology 15 
116, 396–405 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0310.2010.01761.x. 
196. M. Takahasi, H. Yamada, & K. Okanoya, Statistical and Prosodic Cues for Song 
Segmentation Learning by Bengalese Finches (Lonchura striata var. domestica). Ethology 
116, 481–489 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0310.2010.01772.x. 
197. K. Suzuki, H. Yamada, T. Kobayashi, & K. Okanoya, Decreased fecal corticosterone levels 20 
due to domestication: a comparison between the white-backed Munia (Lonchura striata) 
and its domesticated strain, the Bengalese finch (Lonchura striata var. domestica) with a 
suggestion for complex song evolution. Journal of Experimental Zoology. Part A, 
Ecological Genetics and Physiology 317, 561–570 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.1748. 25 
198. K. Suzuki & K. Okanoya, Domestication effects on aggressiveness: Comparison of biting 
motivation and bite force between wild and domesticated finches. Behavioural Processes 
193, 104503 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2021.104503. 
199. K. Suzuki, M. Ikebuchi, H. Kagawa, T. Koike, & K. Okanoya, Effects of domestication on 
neophobia: A comparison between the domesticated Bengalese finch (Lonchura striata 30 
var. domestica) and its wild ancestor, the white-rumped munia (Lonchura striata). 
Behavioural Processes 193, 104502 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2021.104502. 
200. E. Honda & K. Okanoya, Acoustical and Syntactical Comparisons between Songs of the 
White-backed Munia (Lonchura striata) and Its Domesticated Strain, the Bengalese Finch 
(Lonchura striata var. domestica). Zoological Science 16, 319–326 (1999). 35 
https://doi.org/10.2108/zsj.16.319. 
201. Y. Tobari, C. Theofanopoulou, C. Mori, Y. Sato, M. Marutani, S. Fujioka, N. Konno, K. 
Suzuki, A. Furutani, S. Hakataya, C.-T. Yao, E.-Y. Yang, C.-R. Tsai, P.-C. Tang, C.-F. 
Chen, C. Boeckx, E. D. Jarvis, & K. Okanoya, Oxytocin variation and brain region-

PAGE 34
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
34 
 
specific gene expression in a domesticated avian species. Genes, Brain and Behavior 21, 
e12780 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1111/gbb.12780. 
202. T. O’Rourke, P. T. Martins, R. Asano, R. O. Tachibana, K. Okanoya, & C. Boeckx, 
Capturing the Effects of Domestication on Vocal Learning Complexity. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 25, 462–474 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.03.007. 5 
203. K. M. Kendrick, The Neurobiology of Social Bonds. Journal of Neuroendocrinology 16, 
1007–1008 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2826.2004.01262.x. 
204. T. M. Love, Oxytocin, motivation and the role of dopamine. Pharmacology Biochemistry 
and Behavior 119, 49–60 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2013.06.011. 
205. O. J. Bosch & L. J. Young, "Oxytocin and Social Relationships: From Attachment to Bond 10 
Disruption" in Behav. Pharmacol. Neuropept. Oxytocin, R. Hurlemann, & V. 
Grinevich,eds. (Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018), pp. 97–117. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2017_10. 
206. B. Hare, Survival of the Friendliest: Homo sapiens Evolved via Selection for Prosociality. 
Annual Review of Psychology 68, 155–186 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-15 
010416-044201. 
207. L. Progovac & A. Benítez-Burraco, From Physical Aggression to Verbal Behavior: 
Language Evolution and Self-Domestication Feedback Loop. Frontiers in Psychology 10, 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02807. 
208. L. Raviv & S. Kirby, "Self-domestication and the Cultural Evolution of Language" in Oford 20 
Handbook Cultural Evolution, (2023). 
209. J. Thomas & S. Kirby, Self domestication and the evolution of language. Biology & 
Philosophy 33, 9 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-018-9612-8. 
210. T. M. Freeberg, R. I. M. Dunbar, & T. J. Ord, Social complexity as a proximate and 
ultimate factor in communicative complexity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 25 
Society B: Biological Sciences 367, 1785–1801 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0213. 
211. L. Raviv, L. R. Peckre, & C. Boeckx, What is simple is actually quite complex: A critical 
note on terminology in the domain of language and communication. Journal of 
Comparative Psychology (2022). https://doi.org/10.1037/com0000328. 30 
212. A. Formaux, D. Sperber, J. Fagot, & N. Claidière, Guinea baboons are strategic 
cooperators. Science Advances 9, eadi5282 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adi5282. 
213. G. W. Hewes, R. J. Andrew, L. Carini, H. Choe, R. A. Gardner, A. Kortlandt, G. S. Krantz, 
G. McBride, F. Nottebohm, J. Pfeiffer, D. G. Rumbaugh, H. D. Steklis, M. J. Raliegh, R. 
Stopa, A. Suzuki, S. L. Washburn, & R. W. Wescott, Primate Communication and the 35 
Gestural Origin of Language [and Comments and Reply]. Current Anthropology 14, 5–24 
(1973). https://doi.org/10.1086/201401. 

PAGE 35
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
35 
 
214. M. C. Corballis, From mouth to hand: Gesture, speech, and the evolution of right-
handedness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26, 199–208 (2003). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03000062. 
215. M. A. Arbib, From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary 
framework for neurolinguistics. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28, 105–124 (2005). 5 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05000038. 
216. P. F. MacNeilage & B. L. Davis, The Frame/Content theory of evolution of speech: A 
comparison with a gestural-origins alternative. Interaction Studies 6, 173–199 (2005). 
https://doi.org/10.1075/is.6.2.03mac. 
217. D. McNeill, How Language Began: Gesture and Speech in Human Evolution (Cambridge: 10 
Cambridge University Press, 2012). 
218. K. Liebal, M. Carpenter, & M. Tomasello, Young children’s understanding of cultural 
common ground. British Journal of Developmental Psychology 31, 88–96 (2013). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-835X.2012.02080.x. 
219. M. A. Arbib, K. Liebal, & S. Pika, Primate Vocalization, Gesture, and the Evolution of 15 
Human Language. Current Anthropology 49, 1053–1076 (2008). 
https://doi.org/10.1086/593015. 
220. S. Goldin-Meadow & D. McNeill, "The role of gesture and mimetic representation in 
making language the province of speech" in Descent Mind, M.C. Corballis, & S. Lea,eds. 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 155–172. 20 
 
Acknowledgments: We thank the Israel Institute for Advanced Studies for providing the funds 
that allowed us to convene this research group, and for creating a truly unique space for deep and 
intense intellectual exploration. We thank the participants of the 2023 workshop on “The Origins 
of human language: a multidisciplinary perspective” for stimulating and insightful discussions. 25 
(https://iias.huji.ac.il/event/origins-language-multidisciplinary-perspective-research-group-
conference). All remaining mistakes are our own.  
 
Funding:  
Israel Institute for Advanced Studies research group fellowship (all authors) 30 
Israel Science Foundation grant 445/20 (IA) 
Institute for Language Communication and the Brain (ILCB) through the Agence Nationale 
de la Recherche grant ANR-16-CONV-0002 (NC) 
ANR TECHNICION grant ANR-21-CE28-0023-02 (NC) 
SCALUP grant ANR-21-CE28-0016-02 (NC) 35 
Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences and Ministry of Education grant JP23H05428 
(KO) 
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology grant #4903 (KO) 

PAGE 36
Submitted Manuscript: What enables human language? A bio-cultural framework 
36 
 
Max Planck Society (LR, SEF) 
NIDCD grant R01 DC00491 (SGM) 
 
Author contributions: 
Conceptualization: All authors contributed. 5 
Visualization: LW, SK, NC, LC, & SEF. 
Funding acquisition: IA & LC secured the funds for the research fellowship that led to the 
development of the paper. 
Project administration: IA & SEF. 
Writing – original draft: IA & SEF created the first draft of the paper structure and led the 10 
introduction. Case studies were drafted by SEF, WTF (vocal production learning), SK, IA 
(emergence of structure), and LR, NC (prosociality). WTF led the writing of the discussion. 
Figures were drafted by LW, together with SK (Fig. 1), SEF (Fig. 2), SGM (Fi g. 3), and 
WTF (Figure 4). Table was drafted by SEF.   
Writing – review & editing: Led by IA & SEF, all authors contributed. 15 
 
Competing interests: All authors declare they have no competing interests.  
 