
===PDF PAGE 1===
Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 32360–32377
July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discovering Properties of Inflectional Morphology
in Neural Emergent Communication
Miles Gilberti Shane Storks Huteng Dai
University of Michigan
{milgil,sstorks,huteng}@umich.edu
Abstract
Emergent communication (EmCom) with deep
neural network-based agents promises to yield
insights into the nature of human language, but
remains focused primarily on a few subfield-
specific goals and metrics that prioritize com-
munication schemes which represent attributes
with unique characters one-to-one and com-
pose them syntactically. We thus reinterpret a
common EmCom setting, the attribute-value
reconstruction game, by imposing a small-
vocabulary constraint to simulate double artic-
ulation, and formulating a novel setting anal-
ogous to naturalistic inflectional morphology
(enabling meaningful comparison to natural
language communication schemes). We de-
velop new metrics and explore variations of
this game motivated by real properties of in-
flectional morphology: concatenativity and fu-
sion. Through our experiments, we discover
that simulated phonological constraints encour-
age concatenative morphology, and emergent
languages replicate the tendency of natural lan-
guages to fuse grammatical attributes.
1 Introduction
Emergent communication (EmCom) studies com-
munication protocols developed between two or
more deep neural agents engaged in a task requir-
ing successful communication. Analyses of learned
protocols in EmCom typically search for character-
istics deemed crucial in natural language, promi-
nently compositionality (Chaabouni et al., 2020).
Such experiments promise to shed light on the pres-
sures underlying human-like language evolution.
However, as interpreting emergent communi-
cation schemes and measuring compositionality
are challenging, inhibitive assumptions are often
made. First, most EmCom works afford agents an
over-complete vocabulary of characters, making
it possible for agents to describe each possible at-
tribute value with a unique character one-to-one,
thus leading to treatment of generated characters
exclusively as words composed only syntactically.
In turn, common evaluation metrics developed for
this large-vocabulary setting are overly simplified,
favoring protocols that represent attribute values
with consistent characters concatenated in a con-
sistent ordering (Chaabouni et al., 2020; Resnick
et al., 2020; Ueda et al., 2023). This disregards
the possibility of many morphological phenomena
attested in natural languages, such as nonconcate-
native morphology (e.g., root-pattern morphology
common in Semitic languages), and fusion of gram-
matical attributes in morphemes (e.g., the Spanish
verb suffix-amossimultaneously communicates
first person, plurality, and present tense).
In this work, we reinterpret EmCom asemergent
morphology, addressing these shortcomings with
two key design choices:
1. We target humanlikedouble articulation
(Hockett, 1960) by enforcing a small char-
acter inventory, necessitating that individually
meaningless characters form combinatorial
morpheme-like symbols to encode attribute
values and combinations thereof.
2. Shown in Figure 1, we introduce a novel con-
figuration of attribute-value reconstruction in-
spired byinflectional morphology, where a
high-cardinality attribute (analogous to roots)
is paired with comparatively lower-cardinality
attributes (analogous to grammatical infor-
mation, e.g., tense and person), encouraging
richer morphological phenomena.
Because agents learn to solve a problem directly
analogous to information communicated by natu-
ral languages, we can thus make deeper and more
direct comparisons between emerged language and
natural language than in prior work. Toward this
goal, we review EmCom evaluation metrics for var-
ious properties of communication schemes, propos-
ing novel metrics for the underexplored properties
of concatenativity and degree of fusion. To validate
32360

===PDF PAGE 2===
Figure 1: We reframe the typical attribute-value (Attr-Val) reconstruction game with an analogy to inflectional
morphology, where rootsℓand slotsσ(e.g., tense and person) comprise attributes which must be communicated
through messages. Emergent communication schemes are then comparable to natural language inflections.
and establish expected ranges for these metrics, we
analyze a representative group of artificial double
articulatory communication schemes and inflection-
based natural language communication schemes.
With these new paradigms and metrics estab-
lished, we conduct some preliminary investigations,
the results of which show how this approach can
rediscover morphological phenomena in human
language, as well as test new hypotheses about its
evolution. Specifically, we:
• Implement a phonology-inspired constraint
in communication agents, using concatenativ-
ity metrics to reveal ease of articulation as a
pressure toward concatenative languages.
• Compare the topographic similarity of emer-
gent and natural languages, finding significant
room for improvement in emergent languages
to reflect natural degrees of compositionality.
• Analyze fusion in emergent and natural lan-
guages for inflection, showing that emergent
languages mostly fuse grammatical attributes
rather than roots, mirroring natural language.
This work opens exciting new directions for fu-
ture research into the evolution of morphology.
2 Related Work
Some other EmCom works address double artic-
ulation explicitly via selection of small inventory
sizes (Ueda and Washio, 2021; Ueda et al., 2023;
Ueda and Taniguchi, 2024), but the analysis fo-
cuses on words rather than morphemes, and only
considers perfectly concatenative methods of com-
bining them. Work utilizing bitstring messages in
EmCom achieves this (Resnick et al., 2020; Gupta
et al., 2020), but not in a linguistically realistic way.
Unlike our work, many works use large-
vocabulary EmCom to investigate various phenom-
ena relevant to natural language morphology. For
example, Chaabouni et al. (2019) use a length pres-
sure to rederive Zipf’s Law of Abbreviation. Lian
et al. (2023, 2024) explore the case-marking versus
word-order tradeoff in pair and group communi-
cation. Conklin and Smith (2023) discover natu-
ralistic variability in emergent languages through
proposed metrics for synonymy, homonymy, word-
order freedom, and entanglement, complicating
typical measures of compositionality. Galke et al.
(2022); Galke and Raviv (2024) explore the impor-
tance of learnability, generalization, production ef-
fort, and group size pressures, among other psycho-
sociolinguistic factors. Gualdoni et al. (2024) and
Tucker et al. (2022) explore information theoretic
constraints on the forms of emerged languages.
Chaabouni et al. (2022) further explore the rela-
tionships between these aspects in a naturalistic vi-
sual task setting, while Kouwenhoven et al. (2024)
investigate the effect of agents’ representational
alignment on their performance.
Lastly, there is vast literature studying mor-
phology in human languages. Notably, we adopt
the term “emergent morphology” introduced by
Archangeli and Pulleyblank (2016) within their
Emergent Grammarframework, which hypoth-
esizes how morphophonological structures arise
from constraint interactions in natural languages.
Especially related prior works attempt to model and
analyze the emergence of various aspects of mor-
phological systems (Nowak and Krakauer, 1999;
Zuidema and de Boer, 2009; Elsner et al., 2020;
Dekker, 2024). Unlike these works, we empha-
size computational modeling ofartificial commu-
nication systems, focusing on how minimal mean-
ingless discrete units combine systematically into
meaningful morphological structures like inflec-
tion. Automated morphological segmentation, es-
pecially for nonconcatenative morphology (Full-
wood, 2018), is also relevant. While we only ex-
plored concatenative approaches, we expect such
techniques to play a crucial role in future work
toward understanding morphology in EmCom.
3 Toward Emergent Morphology
Prior EmCom work has largely focused on the
Lewis Signaling Game (Kottur et al., 2017;
32361

===PDF PAGE 3===
Chaabouni et al., 2020; Ueda et al., 2023; Lewis,
1979), in which a sender agent observes some state
and generates a message to a receiver agent, which
must take an action based on it. Success in the
game relies on accurately communicating the rele-
vant features of the environment. Morphology has
been relatively understudied in EmCom due to a
focus on individual characters representing atomic
units of meaning (Boldt and Mortensen, 2024b).
3.1 Attribute-Value Reconstruction Game
The Attribute-Value Reconstruction Game (hence-
forthAttr-Val) has been extensively studied by Em-
Com researchers (Kottur et al., 2017; Chaabouni
et al., 2020). This class of games models the state
as ann-tuple of values where each value belongs to
some attributeAi∈A, defined as a set of possible
values for the attribute. That is, the set of states is
S={s|s= (v1∈A1,v 2∈A2,...,vn∈An)}.
Formally, Attr-Val can be defined as such: we
have a states∈S, a sender fθ:S→M , and a
receivergθ:M→S.M is the space of messages
of up to length m characters, all of which must
belong to a fixed character vocabulary C. This
instance is considered successful ifgθ(fθ(s)) =s.
3.2 Attr-Val as Inflectional Morphology
The attribute value sets A∈Atend to have the
same cardinality in prior work (Kottur et al., 2017;
Chaabouni et al., 2020; Ueda et al., 2023), often
motivating analogies to communicating properties
of objects with few possible values, e.g., a red
square or blue triangle. We claim that Attr-Val
games also represent a rich analogy for inflectional
morphology. The meaning of an inflected root in
natural language consists of the root as well as addi-
tional attributes like tense and person for verbs, or
number and gender for nouns. Like Attr-Val, these
attributes take on a finite set of values. While the
number of possible roots is unbounded in natural
language, Attr-Val can simulate this through one
attribute set (representing roots) being much larger
than others. This paradigm provides a key advan-
tage: natural languages solve an analogous and sim-
ilarly challenging problem to this, enabling direct
comparison with learned communication schemes.
We consider 4 configurations forA: adefault
setting resembling prior work with 3 attributes of
16 values each (16×16×16), and 3 novelinflec-
tionsettings with nonuniform attribute value sets
(42×2×3, 42×2×2×2, and 42×6). In inflection
settings, the largest attribute set symbolizes roots,
while others symbolize grammatical properties like
tense and person. Settings have a comparable total
number of attribute values (47-48).1 To necessitate
double articulation, i.e., composing meaningless
characters into meaningful symbols to represent
attributes, we enforce a consistent character vocab-
ulary size|C|= 8and message length m= 9 ,
smaller than the size of most attribute sets. We
assume virtually all natural languages have sig-
nificantly more roots than properties that can be
inflected for due to the inherently limited nature
of such grammatical information, so this design
reflects the actual structure of natural languages.
Importantly, one attribute in the inflection settings
has many more possible values than|C|while oth-
ers have fewer, possibly incentivizing more mor-
phologically diverse communication schemes.
3.3 Agent Implementation
Following prior works, we use EGG (Kharitonov
et al., 2019) to implement sender and receiver
agents as single layer gated recurrent unit (GRU;
Cho et al., 2014) models, 2 with hidden dimen-
sions of 500. Senders were optimized using REIN-
FORCE (Williams, 1992) and receivers with back-
propagation following Chaabouni et al. (2019) us-
ing the accuracy (i.e., proportion of attributes cor-
rectly reconstructed) as a loss, with cross-entropy
loss as a supplementary loss term.3 Additional im-
plementation details are provided in Appendix B.
4 Interpreting Communication Schemes
To investigate double articulation in EmCom, we
next introduce methods to evaluate communica-
tion schemes by extracting meaningful symbols
from messages, and measuring various properties
of them. We then establish reference points for
emergent communication schemes based on both
idealized artificial languages and natural languages.
4.1 Evaluating Communication Schemes
The need for stronger evaluations in EmCom is
well-established (Boldt and Mortensen, 2024b;
1We also ran experiments controlling for total number of
combinations, but models did not converge (see Appendix A).
2We also attempted to implement agents with transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017). However, even the best hyperparameter
settings failed to converge to the degree of accuracy found in
the GRU agents, even when given significantly more time (24
hours vs. 8). Due to the very low accuracy, it is impossible to
make meaningful conclusions, so these results are omitted.
3This supplementary loss allowed smoother and more reli-
able convergence with lower sequence lengths, desirable for
obtaining interpretable and minimally complex languages.
32362

===PDF PAGE 4===
Chaabouni et al., 2020), and especially promi-
nent in our problem setting, which aims to con-
sider a greater number of plausible communication
schemes than prior work. As such, we next intro-
duce and appraise several algorithms for segment-
ing meaningful symbols from sequences of charac-
ters, as well as evaluation metrics for sequences of
symbols in communication schemes.
4.1.1 Symbol Segmentation Algorithms
To extract meaningful, morpheme-like symbols
from messages (essential for double articulation),
we consider two approaches: one from prior work
based on Harris’ articulation scheme (Ueda et al.,
2023), and a previously unexplored approach based
on byte-pair encoding (Gage, 1994). We define the
resulting segmented symbol vocabularyV as the
set union of symbols extracted from each message.
Harris’ Articulation SchemeHarris’ articula-
tion scheme (HAS; Harris, 1955; Tanaka-Ishii,
2021) has been proposed as a desirable, natural-
istic trait for emergent languages to exhibit (Ueda
et al., 2023; Ueda and Taniguchi, 2024). HAS cap-
tures the tendency of word boundaries to be identifi-
able purely by character-level entropy. Specifically,
the scheme claims that while entropy generally
decreases across an utterance, it will increase at
morpheme boundaries. This implies an algorithm
for segmenting morphemes by drawing boundaries
at indices i whereHi−Hi+1 > τ, where τis a
threshold that determines how sensitive the algo-
rithm is. In all of our analyses, τis set to 0 to
maximize sensitivity. We use the implementation
provided by Ueda et al. (2023).
Byte-Pair EncodingHAS is a powerful tool for
identifying symbols in communication schemes,
but it is difficult to control the degree of segmen-
tation by it. As such, we propose an alternative
approach based on the Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE)
algorithm (Gage, 1994), which has been widely
used in tokenizers for NLP systems (Sennrich et al.,
2016). Importantly for our purposes, the proper-
ties of the subwords generated by BPE have been
shown to enable characterization of languages by
established typological categories, such as analytic
and synthetic (Gutierrez-Vasques et al., 2023). BPE
is configurable with a maximum vocabulary size
|V|. Early compressions tend to be most informa-
tive (Gutierrez-Vasques et al., 2021, 2023), so we
apply BPE with a merging cutoff of 96, approxi-
mately twice the expected number of symbols (i.e.,
the total number of unique attribute values), and ad-
ditionally apply BPE with maximum compression.
4.1.2 Evaluation Metrics
Given a segmented symbol vocabularyV , we next
discuss common metrics for its compositionality
from prior work. We then introduce methods to
evaluate concatenativity and degree of fusion, more
specific forms of compositionality that typical com-
positionality metrics do not directly measure, as
well as learnability, which has previously been con-
nected to compositionality (Kirby et al., 2014; Li
and Bowling, 2019; Chaabouni et al., 2020).
CompositionalityCompositionality is the core
objective for many EmCom works, motivated by
interpretability and its prominence in natural lan-
guages. Topographic similarity (TopSim) is a com-
mon measure for this (Brighton and Kirby, 2006;
Lazaridou et al., 2018), formally defined as the
correlation of the distance (typically Levenshtein
distance; Levenshtein, 1965) between pairs of mes-
sages and the distance between their meanings.
This provides a global measure of how similar the
symbols in messages for similar configurations.
However, TopSim places minimal restrictions on
how similarity of messages is calculated. As such,
Chaabouni et al. (2020) propose bag-of-symbols
disentanglement (BoSDis), an alternative metric ac-
counting for permutation-invariant communication
schemes4 (e.g., “A and B” versus “B and A”):
1
|V|
∑
v∈V
I(nv;av)−I(nv;bv)
H(nv) (1)
BoSDis calculates the mean entropy-normalized
difference in mutual information I between the
countnv of a vocabulary symbol v∈Vand at-
tributes av and bv, which have the 2 highest I
values withv. This measures whether a charac-
ter’s presence in a message uniquely communicates
a specific attribute value. This should generally
not happen in our small-vocabulary setting, which
necessitates reuse of characters in multi-character
symbols to induce double articulation,5 thus BoS-
Dis should be low. However, if an algorithm effec-
tively segments symbols which uniquely refer to
attributes, the BoSDis with respect to those sym-
bols should be higher. We thus gauge whether HAS
4They also propose positional disentanglement, which we
omit but provide more details about in Appendix D.
5One-character symbols are an exception, but an accurate
communication scheme has very limited capacity for these.
32363

===PDF PAGE 5===
and BPE extract meaningful symbols through a ra-
tioBoSDis V
C of BoSDis for a segmented symbol
vocabularyV and unsegmented characters C. If
BoSDisV
C >1 , thenV creates a more disentangled
representation than individual characters C, thus
Vcontains meaningful multi-character symbols.
ConcatenativityTopSim and BoSDis fail to ac-
count for non-trivial and variable forms of compo-
sitionality, including some present in natural lan-
guage (Korbak et al., 2020; Conklin and Smith,
2023). For example, TopSim based on Levenshtein
distance of characters reflects an assumption that
characters should not be modified or reordered un-
der composition. Contrarily, we aim to consider
any scheme where messages are formed via a sys-
tematic composition of symbols (i.e., as opposed
to a memorized “hash function”) as compositional.
One particular form of compositionality we aim
to tease apart from others isconcatenativity, i.e.,
the degree to which composable symbols consist
of uninterrupted streams of characters (analogous
to phonemes) that are concatenated under composi-
tion.6 Using English verb conjugation as an exam-
ple, “played” is a concatenative message consisting
of “play” and “ed.” By contrast, “sang” is a non-
concatenative message since the characters “s_ng”
correspond to the root “sing,” but are interrupted
by “a,” which communicates tense.
As HAS and BPE require symbols to be com-
posed of consecutive characters, we estimate con-
catenativity as the average number of symbols in
segmented messages of a communication scheme.
We refer to these length metrics asHASLenand
BPELen|V|.7 A smaller number of symbols indi-
cates greater concatenativity, as more consecutive
characters belong in self-contained units of mean-
ing. Of course, not all compositional communi-
cation schemes are concatenative. In Section 5.1,
we will apply concatenativity metrics to contrived
concatenative and nonconcatenative compositional
schemes to analyze how these properties relate.
Degree of FusionFusionis the expression of
multiple attributes of meaning within one mor-
pheme or symbol. Prior work examines this by
taking conditional probabilities of surface forms
6This is closely related tointegrityin optimality theory,
which prohibits output forms from containing multiple corre-
spondents to an input form (McCarthy and Prince, 1995).
7For HASLen, we use the number of boundaries. Since
HAS relies on entropy, we note that HASLen may be arti-
ficially low in communication schemes that include some
random or otherwise non-meaningful characters.
after ablating feature pairs from data (Rathi et al.,
2021, 2022), but this requires computationally ex-
pensive training of models for each feature pair.
The fusion of two attributes A1,A 2 is equivalent
to treating them as one attributeA12 =A 1×A2,
for which symbols may be chosen arbitrarily, and
a language may be compositional with respect to
a particular fused attribute set. As such, we de-
fine a novel metric of fused TopSim (F-TopSim),
calculated by the maximum TopSim over the fu-
sions of all attribute pairs. A language is fusional if
F-TopSim≥TopSim, so we summarize the degree
of fusion with F-TopSimδ=F-TopSim−TopSim.
LearnabilityTo explore its relationship with con-
catenativity and fusion, we measure learnability as
the mean number of trainingepochsthat a receiver
takes to exceed 99% reconstruction accuracy.
5 Artificial and Natural Reference Points
Next, we curate reference compositional communi-
cation schemes. To evaluate how metrics capture
the above properties and establish expected ranges,
we first propose artificial languages to target them.
To contextualize EmCom results with real-world
communication schemes, we develop additional
languages based on natural language inflections.
5.1 Artificial Languages
As shown in Figure 2, we generate 5 artificial lan-
guages with a range of morphological complexity
using message lengthm= 8 and vocabulary size
|C|= 9. The first 4 types compose symbols of
constant and mixed length with varied levels of
concatenativity. These languages preserve symbols
and the ordering of their characters under compo-
sition, favored by TopSim. The fusion language
violates this by assigning symbols to combinations
of attribute values rather than individual ones. Ta-
bles 1-2 report metrics for receivers trained on these
languages. We list key observations below.8
First, the degree of concatenation has minimal
effect on learnability, implying a lack of induc-
tive bias toward concatenation in recurrent receiver
networks. BoSDis V
C metrics confirm that HAS
and BPE extract more meaningful morphemes
from more concatenative languages, despite all lan-
guages being compositional. HASLen and BPE-
Len are lower in more concatenative languages,
suggesting these metrics effectively reflect con-
catenativity. Mixed concatenative languages have
8More discussion and artificial languages in Appendix E.
32364

===PDF PAGE 6===
Perfectly 
Concatenative
Symbols for 
attributes are 
concatenated
abchijxyz
Perfectly 
Nonconcatenative
Symbols for 
attributes are 
interleaved
A1
A2
A3
ahxbiycjz
ahibcxyjz
abhxcyzij
hxyzabcij
Mixed 
Concatenative
Symbols are 
divided into 
subunits which are 
interleaved 
according to 
random scheme
abc
hij
xyz
A1
A2
A3
abc
hij
xyz
A1
A2
A3
abc
hij
xyz
Variable Length
Concatenative, 
but symbols can 
vary in length. 
More realistic
ahijklxyz
A1
A2
A3
a
hijkl
xyz
Fusion
Symbols are 
assigned to 
combinations of 
attributes and 
concatenated. 
qrstuvxyzA1
A2
A3 xyz
qrstuv
Figure 2: Artificial languages. Each language defines
a unique symbol for each possible attribute value, but
varies the composition operation for symbols.
higher variance in BPELen, falling along a spec-
trum between perfectly concatenative and noncon-
catenative languages, and random languages have
markedly higher asymptotic BPELen than others,
further evidence of BPE’s effectiveness. As ex-
pected, HAS is less effective for languages with
randomness, evidenced by low HAS BoSDis V
C
and HASLen in mixed concatenative and variable
length languages, with the latter also low in random
languages.9 BoSDisV
C metrics are large for random
languages, suggesting an over-sensitivity to noise
in the absence of other signal. Lastly, F-TopSimδ
effectively reflects fusion in the fusion languages.
5.2 Natural Languages
As a comparison to humanlike communication
schemes, we also analyze subsets of the verb con-
jugations of two natural languages, Spanish and
Arabic, as Attr-Val languages. We chose these due
to the availability of high-quality datasets, the fact
that both conjugate for tense and person, and the
fact that they represent fairly divergent commu-
nication schemes along the concatenativity axis.
Spanish data comes from Jehle (2011), and Ara-
bic data from Nawaz et al. (2025). We select a
set of verb attributes comparable to the inflection
9Supplementary results with HASLen in Appendix F.
Attr-Val setting: root, tense, and person. We then
generate Attr-Val configurations based on combina-
tions of these verb attributes sampled from the data,
which serve as cognitively plausible (albeit sim-
plified) representations of actual cognitive objects
and events encoded and reconstructed in natural
communication. For other attributes beyond tense
and person, we choose a constant value (e.g., mood
is always indicative). We generate 50 such inflec-
tional sublanguages for Spanish and Arabic, each
of which are mappings between lexeme-slot tuples
(ℓ,σ)and surface formsw(Wu et al., 2019).
Up to 76% of generated Spanish sublanguages
can be meaningfully segmented by either HAS or
BPE (i.e., BoSDisV
C > 1), while only up to 8% of the
Arabic sublanguages can be10, demonstrating how
both tools for symbol segmentation are insufficient
for nonconcatenative morphology. Other metrics
for these sublanguages are discussed in Section 6.
6 EmCom Experiments
Our Attr-Val settings targeting double articulation
and inflection, general and specific evaluation met-
rics for communication schemes, and illustrative
artificial and natural language reference points en-
able us to ask previously unexplored research ques-
tions around morphology in EmCom. To scratch
the surface of this space, we ask:
1. Do more concatenative languages emerge un-
der a human-inspired evolutionary pressure
for ease of articulation?
2. How do topographic similarity in emergent
and natural languages for inflection compare?
3. Do emergent languages exhibit fusion in in-
flection similarly to natural languages?
We next introduce experimental details, includ-
ing the above articulation pressure. Guided by
these questions, we then present the results of this
initial exploration as a proof of concept.
6.1 Experimental Design
Prior EmCom experiments have often explored
pressures inspired by human evolution, such as
ease of learning (Kirby et al., 2014; Li and Bowling,
2019) among others (Vithanage et al., 2023; Galke
and Raviv, 2024), to encourage compositionality
in emergent communication schemes. Meanwhile,
prior work often assumes or favors concatenativ-
ity in evaluation (Resnick et al., 2020; Ueda et al.,
2023) despite the possibility of compositional but
10Detailed analysis in Appendix G.
32365

===PDF PAGE 7===
Language TopSim BoSDis HAS BoSDis V
C BPE96 BoSDisV
C BPEMax BoSDisV
C F-TopSimδEpochs
Perf. Conc. .628±.01.076±.034.889±4.477.836±3.72.751±.34 -.236±.01 4.875±.83
Mixed Conc. .621±.00.076±.032.146±.701.829±.84.430±.23 -.236±.01 3.875±.64
Nonconcat. .624±.01.076±.03.509±.18.825±.43.379±.15 -.237±.01 4.875±.99
Var. Length .451±.03.085±.031.965±1.015.110±1.77.796±.28 -.131±.02 10.00±3.85
Fusion .238±.03.126±.019.685±.084.474±.15.402±.03 .175±.01 29.13±3.09
Random .000±.00.001±.003.437±1.148.263±2.7119.51±7.32 .000±.00 100+
Table 1: Evaluation of compositionality, degree of fusion, and learnability of artificial languages, averaged over 8
random seeds. 1σconfidence intervals provided to within 2 decimal points, or whole numbers for larger values.
nonconcatenative communication schemes (e.g.,
our artificial and natural reference languages).
In order to achieve concatenative emergent lan-
guages with double articulation, we explore anease
of articulationpressure. Human spoken languages
are universally subject to phonological rules which
determine the possibility of vocal sounds based on
the environment and vocal tract physiology (Dediu
et al., 2017). The interface between phonology
and morphology is a key area of study in linguis-
tics, and a computational evolutionary model of
morphology (as we hope to lay the groundwork
for) would be incomplete without considering that
morphemes are made up of meaningless compo-
nents subject to similar rules independent of their
meanings. Specifically, there are disallowed clus-
ters of sounds in spoken languages (e.g., Hawaiian
disallows consonant clusters), which may repre-
sent a significant pressure towards concatenative
languages. To test this, we added a term to the train-
ing loss for a toy simulated phonology for agents,
where even-valued characters can not occur next to
even-valued characters, and odd-valued characters
can not occur next to odd-valued characters. For-
mally, for a messages comprised of a sequence of
integer tokens, the loss term for ease of articulation
pressure is computed as:
a(si,sj) =
{
1s i≡sj mod 2
0otherwise
Larticulation =ϵ
|s|−1∑
i=1
a(si,si+1)(2)
ϵis a hyperparameter which controls how strict the
phonological rule is. We tried 1, 10, and 100 as
values and found that 10 resulted in fairly strict ad-
herence without incurring optimization problems,
soϵ= 10in our reported experiment.
In all experiments, agents are trained with 8 dif-
ferent random initializations. Emerged languages
are considered successful if the agent achieves 90%
Language HASLen BPELen 96 BPELenMax
Perf. Conc. 2.758±.223.185±.062.001±.00
Mixed Conc. 3.791±.574.489±.202.178±.15
Nonconcat. 4.558±.324.722±.07 2.294±.05
Var. Length 2.463±.303.078±.18 1.995±.00
Fusion 3.502±.214.341±.02 2.004±.01
Random 1.593±.194.997±.013.105±.01
Table 2: Artificial language concatenativity metrics aver-
aged over 8 random seeds, and 1σconfidence intervals.
accuracy on the task, which occurs in most cases.
In both the default and inflection settings, all 8 lan-
guages were successful, with the exception of 1
language in the 42×2×3inflection setting with
the above articulation pressure.
6.2 Experimental Results
In Table 3, we summarize concatenativity and de-
gree of fusion metrics in each Attr-Val setting,
without and with articulation pressure. As shown
there, BPE 96 BoSDisV
C > 1 on average across
all emerged languages, implying the existence of
multi-character meaningful segments and confirm-
ing that double articulation is achieved.
6.2.1 Concatenativity and Articulation
We visualize the concatenativity (measured by
BPELen) of emergent communication schemes in
the default and inflection Attr-Val settings respec-
tively in Figures 3 and 4. First, we observe no
inductive bias toward concatenativity in our RNN-
based agents as previous works implicitly assume;
instead, emergent languages fall along a spectrum
between perfectly concatenative and nonconcatena-
tive. Table 4 demonstrates a particularly obvious
nonconcatenative symbol from an emergent lan-
guage, where repetitions of e seem to indicate 2 as
the second attriute value. While manual inspection
does not prove that such patterns play a causal role
in the receiver’s selection, we find this example
illustrative of the fact that EmCom agents can and
32366

===PDF PAGE 8===
Setting Art. TopSim BoSDis HAS BoSDis V
C BPE96 BoSDisV
C BPELen96 F-TopSimδ
16×16×16✗.339±.034 .213±.047 3.25±4.31 1.25±.359 3.82±.235 -.0418±.0210
16×16×16✓.330±.028 .196±.076 5.98±8.53 1.04±.359 3.534±.133 -.0691±.0350
42×2×3✗.247±.119 .504±.0629 1.79±.0943 1.23±.0604 3.257±.225 -.0078±.028
42×2×3✓.144±0.102 .509±.0861 1.42±1.03 1.56±1.79 2.34±.182 -.0083±.0178
42×2×2×2✗.0859±.039 .6585±0.593 11.9±6.07 7.23±2.82 2.69±0.229 .0415±.0289
42×2×2×2✓0.146±.0860 .323±0.103 8.79±10.7 11.2±8.04 2.33±.226 .0219±.0185
42×6✗.0880±.0367 .582±.136 2.17±6.07 1.47±2.82 2.69±0.212 N/A
42×6✓.239±.0645 .645±.452 2.16±.775 2.51±1.25 2.33±0.181 N/A
Table 3: Evaluation of compositionality, concatenativity, and degree of fusion of emergent languages in default and
inflection Attr-Val settings, without and with articulation pressure (Art.).
Figure 3: BPELen at varying|V|for emergent and natural languages in the 42×2×3inflection Attr-Val setting.
Comprehensive plots for the full range of inflection experiments with natural language comparisons in Appendix I.
do find interesting, nonconcatenative structures.
This may not be unrealistic: the natural lan-
guages also exhibit such a spectrum. Spanish ap-
pears relatively diverse, likely due to the presence
of vowel patterns and auxilliary verbs. Arabic is
more bimodal, with some very nonconcatenative
sublanguages and some which have a high maximal
compression due to being very fusional.
However, the introduction of articulation pres-
sure sharply decreases BPELen in emergent lan-
guages. We perform additionalt-tests on the mean
BPELen96 of emergent languages between con-
ditions, observing statistical significance in this
change for both the default and inflection Attr-Val
setting (p≈0.009and p≈4.5·10−7respec-
tively). This suggests ease of articulation is in-
deed a strong pressure towards concatenation, and
the presence of “unpronounceable” clusters at the
phonological (character) level is sufficient to in-
duce concatenation at the morphological (symbol)
level. More broadly, this may help explain the
dominance of concatenative morphology in natural
languages. Table 4 identifies a concatenative sym-
bol in a language from this setting, where the string
bebecommunicates a first attribute value of 10.
It is also worth noting that in the default Attr-
Val setting, all of the successful articulatory lan-
guages exhibited BoSDisV
C >1 . In the inflection
setting, only 3 of 7 successful languages exhibited
BoSDisV
C >1 , indicating that not all of the seg-
mentations were meaningful. We hypothesize that
the additional constraint caused difficulties in seg-
menting, or alternatively that the pressure may have
also resulted in highly nonconcatenative languages
that appear concatenative due to the additional unin-
formative pattern induced by the articulation pres-
sure. The fact that the intersection of these two
conditions results in a somewhat unintuitive result
underscores the need for future work to understand
the fine-grained details of EmCom.
Figure 4: BPELen at varying |V|for emergent lan-
guages in the default Attr-Val setting.
6.2.2 TopSim in Inflectional Languages
To shed more light on the compositionality of natu-
ralistic communication schemes, we compare the
TopSim of emergent and natural languages in the
inflection Attr-Val setting in Figure 5, including
emergent languages with the articulation pressure.
Compared to natural languages, TopSim for emer-
32367

===PDF PAGE 9===
State Message
(0, 2)eedhedhee
(1, 2)eehedebeb
(2, 2)eedeedeeh
... ...
(40, 2)eehebebeb
(41, 2)eeedeeebe
State Message
(10, 0, 0)hehgbebeb
(10, 0, 1)bebgbebeb
(10, 0, 2)bebgbebeb
(10, 1, 0)ebcbgbebe
(10, 1, 1)ebcbgbebe
(10, 1, 2)ebcbgbebe
Table 4: Example nonconcatenative (left) and concate-
native (right) symbols from successful emergent com-
munication schemes. Message vocabulary displayed as
Latin letters for readability.Left:The repeated charac-
ter e represents states with a second attribute value of 2
across all combinations in the 42×6inflection-inspired
setting (most omitted for space).Right:The string bebe
represents states with a first attribute value of 10 across
all combinations in the 42×2×3inflection-inspired
setting with ease of articulation pressure.
Figure 5: Topographic similarities of 42×2×3emer-
gent (without and with articulation pressure) and natural
languages. See Appendix I for additional conditions.
gent languages was low, except for one instance
with TopSim of .507 (in the range of natural lan-
guages). In the 42×2×2×2and 42×6settings, but
not in the42×2×3setting, the articulation pressure
resulted in a significant increase in TopSim. There
seems to be a complex interplay between this con-
straint and the specific attribute-value setup, which
we leave for future work to explore in depth. To-
gether, this suggests that emergent languages still
have room for improvement in achieving human-
like topographic similarity, and there may remain
more pressures toward this to identify and explore.
6.2.3 Fusion Under Inflection
As we would predict, the 16×16×16setting was
least fusional, with a quite negative F-TopSimδ. In
the 42×2×3setting, F-TopSimδwas near 0, with
0 within a standard deviation of the mean. This
implies there was some degree of fusion within
these languages, since a completely non-fusional
language would suffer a large drop in TopSim by
fusing two attributes. The 42×2×2×2setting was
quite fusional, with a mean F-TopSimδof 0.0415
(i.e., by fusing the right attributes, we get a TopSim
increase of over 0.04.)
Suppletion (fusion of a root with grammatical
features, e.g.,wentas the past tense ofgo) is much
rarer than fusion between grammatical features.
Our EmCom results mirror this: the pair of lowest-
cardinality attributes (representing tense and per-
son) had the highest F-TopSim δin 6 of 8 of the
42×2×3emergent languages, suggesting these at-
tributes are most likely to fuse. Similar results were
observed for the 42×2×2×2setting. This may be
explained by symbolic complexity (Zhang, 2025)
increasing the least in fusing these attribute pairs;
while 5 symbols are required to communicate the
values for these two attributes before fusion, only
6 are required after. Meanwhile, fusing the root
attribute (with 42 values) with another attribute can
drastically increase the symbolic complexity (i.e.,
2-3 times). This trend mirrors the fusion of fixed
grammatical features in natural language, which
we also observed in most of our generated Arabic
and Spanish sublanguages.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we outline an experimental paradigm
for emergent morphology, motivated by the prin-
ciple of double articulation and a rich analogy
between the Attr-Val game and inflectional mor-
phology. We review existing metrics for EmCom,
proposing new ones for concatenativity and de-
gree of fusion. We calibrate our metrics towards
a wide array of idealized compositional schemes
that are possible under this paradigm, as well as
schemes based on natural language inflection. We
then demonstrate through EmCom experiments the
power of this reimagined setting to produce linguis-
tically interesting analyses grounded in compari-
son to natural language. In particular, the double
articulation aspect of our paradigm reveals simu-
lated articulatory constraints as a promising pres-
sure toward concatenativity, which prior work has
often implicitly assumed in evaluations of com-
positionality and attempted to elicit through other
pressures, and future work may use to test more
specific morphophonological hypotheses. Further,
our emergent languages rederive the bias towards
fusion of grammatical features in natural language.
Future work should adopt small-vocabulary and
inflectional Attr-Val settings for focused, linguis-
tically motivated studies of morphology allowing
direct comparison to natural language.
32368

===PDF PAGE 10===
Limitations
Naturalness of task inputs.Like related works
(Resnick et al., 2020; Chaabouni et al., 2020; Ueda
et al., 2023), we chose to focus on Attr-Val recon-
struction as our EmCom task setting. This setting
removes the requirement of agents to perceive key
features from stimuli (e.g., images), instead only
requiring agents to learn to communicate ground
truth features, significantly simplifying the learn-
ing problem. However, we intentionally chose this
setting to ensure comparability with Ueda et al.
(2023), and because our work is entirely focused
on how EmCom agents learn to communicate fea-
tures, thus possible perception errors would need-
lessly obstruct this effort. Further, considering that
we aim to explore inflectional morphology in Em-
Com, the Attr-Val game is a natural analogy to
existing models of morphology in linguistics, e.g.,
the lexeme-slot encoding of inflectional morphol-
ogy (Wu et al., 2019). Nonetheless, while out of
scope for this work, an interesting direction for
future work would be to investigate relationships
between aspects of visual stimuli and morphology
in emergent languages with small vocabularies.
Representativeness of natural languages.In
our natural language reference points, we only con-
sidered Arabic and Spanish, which are not a repre-
sentative sample of the world’s natural languages,
and were chosen in part due to the availability of
data. Without a much larger and more diverse
dataset, we cannot definitively say whether a given
emergent language is naturalistic. Additionally, the
Attr-Val scheme we focused on is a rather small
subset of the complexity of natural morphologies.
A full analysis of a large set of natural languages, to
cover this diversity of morphologies, is outside the
scope of this paper, but we believe our examples
will provide a solid initial point of comparison for
emergent languages. Boldt and Mortensen (2024a)
explored larger-scale cross comparisons of emer-
gent languages, and we anticipate that the addition
of parallel natural language data to such analyses
would prove useful for future work.
Representativeness of articulation pressure.
The choice of an even-odd toy phonological con-
straint for the articulation pressure was arbitrary,
and not representative of the range of such con-
straints in natural language. An alternative expla-
nation for the increased concatenativity from this
pressure is that the predictable even-odd alternation
pattern resulting from this pressure simply made
the data more compressible due to the fewer num-
ber of possible variations in messages. While this
is only a simple proof of concept of the sorts of lin-
guistically motivated experiments we can do when
embracing morphology and double articulation in
EmCom, we argue that phonological constraints in
natural languages may provide a similar advantage
in human language learning, and encourage future
investigation of how they may influence concatena-
tivity and other properties in EmCom.
Acknowledgments
We thank our anonymous reviewers for their
thoughtful and constructive feedback. We thank
Zheyuan Zhang for helpful discussion about this
work, and Ryo Ueda for consulting with us on the
implementation of metrics in Ueda et al. (2023).
This research was supported in part through com-
putational resources and services provided by Ad-
vanced Research Computing at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.
References
Diana Archangeli and Douglas Pulleyblank. 2016.
Emergent morphology. InMorphological metathe-
ory, pages 237–270. John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Brendon Boldt and David Mortensen. 2024a. Elcc:
the emergent language corpus collection.Preprint,
arXiv:2407.04158.
Brendon Boldt and David R Mortensen. 2024b. A
review of the applications of deep learning-based
emergent communication.Transactions on Machine
Learning Research.
Henry Brighton and Simon Kirby. 2006. Understanding
linguistic evolution by visualizing the emergence of
topographic mappings.Artificial Life, 12:229–242.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Diane Boucha-
court, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. 2020.
Compositionality and generalization in emergent lan-
guages. InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 4427–4442, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Emmanuel
Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. 2019. Anti-efficient en-
coding in emergent communication. InAdvances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Rahma Chaabouni, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Eu-
gene Tarassov, Corentin Tallec, Elnaz Davoodi,
32369

===PDF PAGE 11===
Kory Wallace Mathewson, Olivier Tieleman, An-
geliki Lazaridou, and Bilal Piot. 2022. Emergent
communication at scale. InInternational Conference
on Learning Representations.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for
statistical machine translation. InProceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing,, page 1724–1734.
Henry Conklin and Kenny Smith. 2023. Compositional-
ity with variation reliably emerges in neural networks.
InThe Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
Dan Dediu, Rick Janssen, and Scott R. Moisik. 2017.
Language is not isolated from its wider environment:
V ocal tract influences on the evolution of speech and
language.Language & Communication, 54:9–20.
The multimodal origins of linguistic communication.
Peter Dekker. 2024.Identifying drivers of language
change using agent-based models. Ph.D. thesis, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel.
Micha Elsner, Martha B Johnson, Stephanie Ante-
tomaso, and Andrea D Sims. 2020. Stop the mor-
phological cycle, i want to get off: Modeling the
development of fusion.Society for Computation in
Linguistics, 3(1).
Sara Finley and Elissa Newport. 2021. Segmentation of
root and pattern morphology.PsyArXiv.
Michelle Alison Fullwood. 2018.Biases in segmenting
non-concatenative morphology. Ph.D. thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Philip Gage. 1994. A new algorithm for data compres-
sion.The C Users Journal, 2:23–38.
Lukas Galke, Yoav Ram, and Limor Raviv. 2022. Emer-
gent communication for understanding human lan-
guage evolution: What’s missing? InEmeCom at
ICLR 2022.
Lukas Galke and Limor Raviv. 2024. Learning and com-
munication pressures in neural networks: Lessons
from emergent communication.Language Develop-
ment Research, 5.
Eleonora Gualdoni, Mycal Tucker, Roger Levy, and
Noga Zaslavsky. 2024. Bridging semantics and prag-
matics in information-theoretic emergent communi-
cation. InAdvances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, volume 37, pages 21059–21078. Curran
Associates, Inc.
Abhinav Gupta, Cinjon Resnick, Jakob Foerster, An-
drew Dai, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2020. Composi-
tionality and capacity in emergent languages. In
Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Representation
Learning for NLP, pages 34–38, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques, Christian Bentz, and Tanja
Samardži´c. 2023. Languages through the looking
glass of bpe compression.Computational Linguis-
tics, 49(4):943–1001.
Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques, Christian Bentz, Olga Sozi-
nova, and Tanja Samardzic. 2021. From characters
to words: the turning point of BPE merges. InPro-
ceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Main Volume, pages 3454–3468, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zellig S. Harris. 1955. From phoneme to morpheme.
Language, 31(2):190–222.
Charles Hockett. 1960. The origin of speech.Scientific
American, 203:88–96.
Fred Jehle. 2011. Fred Jehle’s conjugated Spanish verb
database.
Eugene Kharitonov, Rahma Chaabouni, Diane Boucha-
court, and Marco Baroni. 2019. Egg: a toolkit for
research on emergence of language in games. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP): System Demonstra-
tions, page 55–60.
Simon Kirby, Tom Griffiths, and Kenny Smith. 2014.
Iterated learning and the evolution of language.Cur-
rent Opinion in Neurobiology, 28:108–114. SI: Com-
munication and language.
Tomasz Korbak, Julian Zubek, and Joanna R ˛ aczaszek-
Leonardi. 2020. Measuring non-trivial composi-
tionality in emergent communication.Preprint,
arXiv:2010.15058.
Satwik Kottur, José Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra.
2017. Natural language does not emerge ‘naturally’
in multi-agent dialog. InProceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, page 2962–2967. Copenhagen,
Denmark. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Tom Kouwenhoven, Max Peeperkorn, Bram Van Dijk,
and Tessa Verhoef. 2024. The curious case of rep-
resentational alignment: Unravelling visio-linguistic
tasks in emergent communication. InProceedings of
the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 57–71, Bangkok, Thailand.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls,
and Stephen Clark. 2018. Emergence of linguistic
communication from referential games with sym-
bolic and pixel input. InInternational Conference on
Learning Representations.
Vladimir I. Levenshtein. 1965. Binary codes capable of
correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.Soviet
physics. Doklady, 10:707–710.
32370

===PDF PAGE 12===
David Lewis. 1979. Scorekeeping in a language game.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8:339–359.
Fushan Li and Michael Bowling. 2019. Ease-of-
teaching and language structure from emergent com-
munication. InAdvances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Yuchen Lian, Arianna Bisazza, and Tessa Verhoef. 2023.
Communication drives the emergence of language
universals in neural agents: Evidence from the word-
order/case-marking trade-off.Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:1033–
1047.
Yuchen Lian, Tessa Verhoef, and Arianna Bisazza. 2024.
NeLLCom-X: A comprehensive neural-agent frame-
work to simulate language learning and group com-
munication. InProceedings of the 28th Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 243–258, Miami, FL, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
John McCarthy and Alan Prince. 1995. Faithfulness and
reduplicative identity.Papers in Optimality Theory.
University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers, 18.
Haq Nawaz, Manal Elobaid, Ali Al-Laith, and Saif Ul-
lah. 2025. Automated generation of Arabic verb
conjugations with multilingual Urdu translation: An
NLP approach. InProceedings of the 1st Workshop
on NLP for Languages Using Arabic Script, pages
136–143, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Martin Nowak and David Krakauer. 1999. The evo-
lution of language.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
96:8028–8033.
Neil Rathi, Michael Hahn, and Richard Futrell. 2021.
An information-theoretic characterization of morpho-
logical fusion.An Information-Theoretic Characteri-
zation of Morphological Fusion.
Neil Rathi, Michael Hahn, and Richard Futrell. 2022.
Explaining patterns of fusion in morphological
paradigms using the memory–surprisal tradeoff. In
Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive
science society, volume 44.
Cinjon Resnick, Abhinav Gupta, Jakob Foerster, An-
drew Dai, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2020. Capacity,
bandwidth, and compositionality in emergent lan-
guage learning. InProceedings of the 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-
agent Systems.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. InProceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1715–1725,
Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. 2021.Articulation of Elements,
pages 115–124. Springer International Publishing,
Cham.
Mycal Tucker, Roger Levy, Julie A Shah, and Noga
Zaslavsky. 2022. Trading off utility, informativeness,
and complexity in emergent communication. InAd-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 35, pages 22214–22228. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Ryo Ueda, Taiga Ishii, and Yusuke Miyao. 2023. On
the word boundaries of emergent languages based on
harris’s articulation scheme. InThe Eleventh Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.
Ryo Ueda and Tadahiro Taniguchi. 2024. Lewis’s sig-
naling game as beta-vae for natural word lengths and
segments. InThe Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna,
Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net.
Ryo Ueda and Koki Washio. 2021. On the relationship
between Zipf‘s law of abbreviation and interfering
noise in emergent languages. InProceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing: Stu-
dent Research Workshop, pages 60–70, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. InAdvances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Kasun Vithanage, Rukshan Wijesinghe, Alex Xavier,
Dumindu Tissera, Sanath Jayasena, and Subha Fer-
nando. 2023. Accelerating language emergence by
functional pressures.PLOS ONE, 18(12):1–28.
Ronald J. Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-
following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning.Mach. Learn., 8(3–4):229–256.
Shijie Wu, Ryan Cotterell, and Timothy O’Donnell.
2019. Morphological irregularity correlates with fre-
quency. InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 5117–5126, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Zheyuan Zhang. 2025. A combinatorial approach to
neural emergent communication. InProceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1660–1666, Abu Dhabi, UAE. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Willem Zuidema and Bart de Boer. 2009. The evolution
of combinatorial phonology.Journal of Phonetics,
37:125–144.
32371

===PDF PAGE 13===
A Additional Notes On Inflection Setting
In the inflection setting of Attr-Val, one possible
limitation is the lack of control on the number of
combinations of attribute values (rather than unique
number of attribute values, which we control for
instead). We conducted a preliminary experiment
where we controlled for number of combinations
rather than number of values, however these models
universally failed to converge, instead learning to
distinguish either grammatical features or roots, but
never both.
We believe that this failure to converge is re-
lated to the model capacity, as explored by Resnick
et al. (2020), Specifically, we hypothesize that for
languages with more unique values (i.e., symbolic
complexity as defined in Zhang, 2025), the min-
imum model capacity for a successful language
increases. While we could simply increase the size
of this model (e.g., embedding and/or hidden size)
to better encourage its convergence, it would no
longer be comparable to other results. Meanwhile,
if we increased the sizes of all models, this may
influence compositionality in less complex config-
urations. As such, we decided that a comparison
controlling for the number of combinations would
not be possible within the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, we chose our specific Attr-Val con-
figuration in the interest of comparability to nat-
ural language. To make a good comparison, we
needed to be able to select features from natural
language with equal or greater cardinalities to our
artificial features. As such, there are only so many
grammatical features we can introduce and find
high-quality data for, and considering features with
larger cardinalities would preclude a lot of natural
language features like gender, number, person, etc.
and severely limit our dataset. The specific values
were chosen to allow this comparison and control
for symbolic complexity.
B Supplementary Agent Implementation
Details
Observed states for sender agents were imple-
mented by concatenating one-hot vectors for each
attribute. Each run occurred on a single A40 GPU
with 48GB VRAM and took about 8 hours, al-
though many models converged before then. Mod-
els generally converged after about 400 training
epochs.
In the inflection setting, we additionally
weighted the root accuracy so it represented 90% of
the accuracy optimized by agents, both to stabilize
training and reflect that far more of the semantic
content of a word is stored in the lexeme rather
than the slot (thus the lexeme is more important to
communicate). We also experimented with larger
configurations with more “roots,” but we found that
higher input sizes led to unstable training where
agents would learn either to inflect or distinguish
roots, but not both. We attribute this to increased
symbolic complexity of the setting (Zhang, 2025).
C Harris’ Articulation Scheme
We replicated the results in Ueda et al. (2023) that
C-TopSim is greater than W-TopSim. This result
led the authors to suggest that Criterion 3 for Har-
ris’ Articulation Scheme (i.e., W-TopSim should be
higher than C-TopSim) may be unsolvable. As dis-
cussed in Section 4.1.2, we use ratios of BoSDis to
judge whether segmented symbols are meaningful.
We assert that this is a reasonable replacement for
the intended purpose of the criterion, since it asks
the question "do segments act as symbols which
tend to refer to some meanings more than others."
Ueda et al. (2023) report negative results on the
basis of low W-TopSim, which does not hold for
our replacement metric of the BosDis ratio. Thus,
we believe that emergent languages do exhibit
HAS, and that HAS does not represent a significant
gap between natural and emerged languages, as is
claimed. The HAS algorithm, therefore represents
a useful tool for interpreting emergent communica-
tion.
D Positional Disentanglement
Motivated by the possibility that symbols in
different positions could indicate different at-
tributes (common in natural languages), Chaabouni
et al. (2020) propose positional disentanglement
(PosDis):
1
m
∑
v∈V
I(sj;av)−I(sj;bv)
H(sj) (3)
For a communication scheme with messages of
lengthm, PosDis calculates the average difference
C-TopSim W-TopSim
0.611 0.362
Table 5: W-TopSim and C-TopSim for a perfectly con-
catenative language.
32372

===PDF PAGE 14===
in mutual information I between the value of a
symbol sj in position j∈[1,m] and attributes
av andbv, which respectively have the most and
second-most mutual information withv.11 This is
then normalized by the entropyH ofsj. PosDis
will be high if attributes are uniquely distinguish-
able by positions of symbols in messages. However,
as we did not observe insightful trends with respect
to this metric, we omitted PosDis from results pre-
sented in the paper to conserve space.
E Artificial Languages Extended Analysis
In this appendix, we provide extended discussions
about concatenation and fusion in artificial lan-
guages. We then propose and evaluate additional
nontrivial compositional artificial languages based
on mutation and more general functional composi-
tionality.
On ConcatenationFirst, the level of concatena-
tion in the first three artificial languages has min-
imal effect on TopSim and learnability, implying
a lack of inductive bias toward concatenation in
recurrent receiver neural networks. Notably, this
is not consistent with human results in linguistics
(Finley and Newport, 2021), and implies additional
pressures may be required to induce concatenative
morphology. Meanwhile, as expected, BoSDis V
C
metrics indicate that both HAS and BPE success-
fully extract more meaningful morphemes from
more concatenative languages, despite all artifi-
cial languages being compositional. In the mixed
concatenative and variable length languages, HAS
yields lower metrics, suggesting it may indeed be
less effective in languages with randomness. BPE
can seemingly compensate for this as long as a
sufficiently limited vocabulary size|V|is chosen.
The right vocabulary size is not obvious, however,
as the BosDisV
C for BPEMax is relatively low for
artificial languages, suggesting an over-segmented
language that erases the disentanglement of sym-
bols. While segmentation algorithms behave as
expected for systematic languages, these metrics
are greater than 1 for random languages. This may
result from over-sensitivity to noise in the absence
of other signal, e.g., the presence of a few rare,
highly predictive symbols may skew the metric up-
wards. This may also be attributed to a vanishingly
small BoSDis for character-level segmentation. Fu-
11Given the reliance on a consistent message length, we
only apply PosDis based on individual characters rather than
symbols extracted from HAS and BPE.
Figure 6: BPELen at varying|V|for artificial languages,
averaged for random seeds with 1σconfidence interval.
ture research should consider this edge case when
comparing BoSDis before and after symbol seg-
mentation.
Focusing in on concatenativity as measured by
HASLen and BPELen metrics, we unsurprisingly
observe that the perfectly concatenative and vari-
able length languages (which are both entirely
concatenative) exhibit the highest concatenativity,
except for BPELenMax, which shows no sensitiv-
ity to the level of concatenativity in artificial lan-
guages. This further supports the possibility of
over-segmenting languages into symbols. As such,
in Figure 6, we visualize the BPELen for a range of
symbol vocabulary sizes. While minimal compres-
sion and maximal compression are similar across
all artificial languages except the random language,
there is a wide range in which BPELen behaves
as expected. The mixed concatenative languages
appear to fall on a spectrum between perfect con-
catenation and nonconcatenation, thus BPELen ap-
pears to be an effective measure of concatenativity.
Meanwhile, due to the marked difference in BPE-
Len between random and systematic languages,
maximal compression may be an effective way to
judge the amount of randomness in messages.
On FusionF-TopSim δvalues indicate that the
fusion language is indeed the most fusional. We
observe that F-TopSimδfor random languages is
zero, which does not suggest fusion, rather that
TopSim does not change with respect to fusion of
attributes (expected for a random language, which
should not assign any meaningful symbols to any
attribute values or pairs thereof). We observe that
degree of fusion does not vary significantly with
respect to concatenativity, but increases in the vari-
able length concatenative language.
On Mutation and Functional Compositionality
Traditional metrics for compositionality such as
TopSim do not account for some types of non-
trivial compositionality, such as phonemic muta-
tion (e.g., of vowels in inflection ofsing,sang,
32373

===PDF PAGE 15===
andsung), or more general function-based com-
positionality, where symbols from some attributes
serve as functions applied to other attributes. As
visualized in Figure 7, we defined additional lan-
guages for these phenomena. Specifically, follow-
ing Korbak et al. (2020), themutationlanguage
allows symbols to overlap, and combines overlap-
ping characters’ values by addition modulo |C|.
We specifically consider two forms of the mutation
language: Mutation 3, which consists of length 5
symbols each overlapping each other at 3 character
positions, and Mutation0, which consists of length
9 symbols each entirely overlapping. Lastly, the
symbolic functionlanguage defines one symbol as a
function, specifically areorderingfunction applied
to the characters of another symbol. Beyond these
artificial languages, we also consider a baseline
random language.
On BoSDisV
C in Random LanguagesOne may
note that the BoSDis V
C for random languages is
quite high. We expect this for 2 reasons:
1. They have character-level BoSDis close to 0.
2. By sheer random chance, some segments
of characters will be better predictors of at-
tributes than others. This results in a slight
increase in symbol-level BoSDis. This results
in a very high ratio, since even a small ab-
solute increase may be 10x as great as the
original BosDis. For this reason we don’t ad-
vocate putting much stock in the magnitude
of the ratio.
Whether this is a problem for the metric is a matter
of interpretation. We believe that since random lan-
guages are very unique when all metrics, especially
TopSim, are taken into account, the risk of misin-
terpreting a random language as a meaningfully
segmented one is low. Furthermore, this enhances
the confidence we can place in low BosDis ratio
being an indicator of non-concatenativity, as these
languages are qualitatively different from both ran-
dom and concatenative languages (see BoSDiSV
C<
1 for perfectly nonconcatenative languages in Table
1).
The evaluation metrics for these artificial lan-
guages are listed in Tables 6 and 7. Despite being
compositional, these languages drastically impact
evaluation metrics. The reordering and Mutation3
language are substantially less compositional (ac-
cording to TopSim and BoSDis), segmentable, and
Mutation
Deﬁne what 
happens when 
characters 
combine and 
allow symbols 
to overlap
A1
A2
A3
11111
22222
33333
1 1 1 1 1
2 2 2 2 23 3 3 3 3
11336553
Fusion
Symbols are 
assigned to 
combinations of 
attributes and 
concatenated. 
qrstuvxyzA1
A2
A3 xyz
qrstuv
Symbolic 
Function 
(Reordering)
One attribute’s 
symbols are 
reorderings rather 
than strings
cadbjkhiA1
A2
abcd
hijk
A3
cadb
jhki
Figure 7: Artificial languages targeting mutation and
symbolic functions (reordering). These languages de-
fine a unique symbol for each possible attribute value,
and apply nontrivial composition operation for symbols.
learnable than fully concatenative languages. In
Mutation0, where all characters are mutated twice,
the languages were essentially indistinguishable
from random languages by almost all metrics, in-
cluding learnability. Even though this language
consists entirely of messages formed by compos-
ing symbols according to simple, defined rules, in
practice this compositionality may not matter or
be recognized through existing metrics. The only
metrics where there was a noticeable difference
are the BoSDisV
C ratios for HAS and BPE, but the
interpretations of these are unclear, since segments
cannot be disentangled symbols for this type of
language.
F HASLen for Natural and Emergent
Languages
In Figure 8, we visualize the HASLen for emergent
languages (on average) along with Spanish and Ara-
bic natural language reference points. Following
observations in Section 5.1, we observe that Span-
ish and Arabic are scored with a higher HASLen
than random languages. This further demonstrates
HAS’ sensitivity to randomness, making it difficult
to use for reference points of concatenativity (de-
spite its effectiveness in identifying symbol bound-
aries).
G Segmentation Analysis of Natural
Languages
As shown in Table 8, when calculating the
BoSDisV
C ratio for these languages, we find that
32374

===PDF PAGE 16===
Language TopSim BoSDis HAS BoSDis V
C BPE96 BoSDisV
C BPEMax BoSDisV
C F-TopSim Epochs
Reordering .227±.01.042±.0323.24±22.3088.64±76.5613.44±11.84 -0.006±0.01 20.25±5.47
Mutation3 .359±.01.060±.0040.37±017.31±.00.578±.25-.023±.01 24.88±9.85
Mutation0 .000±.00.001±.003146±17367461±309117.204±5.46 .001±.00 100+
Table 6: Evaluation metrics for compositionality, degree of fusion, and learnability of additional artificial languages
averaged over 8 random seeds. Learnability is measured by the average number of epochs that a receiver agent takes
to learn the language, i.e., exceed 99% reconstruction accuracy. 1σconfidence intervals are provided to within 2
decimal points, or whole numbers for large BoSDisV
C values.
SpanishEmergent Languages Arabic
BPELenHASLen
BPE Vocabulary Size BPE Vocabulary Size BPE Vocabulary Size
HAS Entropy ThresholdHAS Entropy ThresholdHAS Entropy Threshold
SpanishEmergent Languages Arabic
BPELenHASLen
BPE Vocabulary Size BPE Vocabulary Size BPE Vocabulary Size
HAS Entropy ThresholdHAS Entropy ThresholdHAS Entropy Threshold
Figure 8: HASLen of emergent and natural languages with respect to HAS entropy threshold.
Language HASLen BPELen 96 BPELenMax
Reordering 2.268±.174.127±.042.086±.01
Mutation3 4.843±.174.461±.042.273±.05
Mutation0 1.560±.384.998±.033.107±.02
Table 7: Evaluation metrics for concatenativity of ar-
tificial languages, averaged over 8 random seeds. 1 σ
confidence intervals are provided to within 2 decimal
points, or whole numbers for large BoSDisV
C values.
HAS BPE 96
Spanish 0.76 0.74
Arabic 0.08 0.00
Table 8: Proportion of sublanguages meaningfully seg-
mented (BoSDisV
C>1) by BPE96 and HAS.
up to 76% of generated Spanish sublanguages 12
can be meaningfully segmented by either HAS or
BPE (i.e., ratio greater than 1), while virtually none
of the Arabic sublanguages can be. On the latter,
this demonstrates how existing tools for symbol
segmentation are insufficient to capture highly non-
concatenative morphologies.
H Ease-of-Learning Pressure Experiment
Inspired by prior work in iterated learning (Kirby
et al., 2014), we implement an experiment incen-
12Some failures here could be attributed to nonconcatena-
tivity in the dataset caused by prepended auxiliary verbs.
tivizing ease of learning in emergent languages
(Li and Bowling, 2019). Specifically, every 100
epochs, we reset the receiver’s network weights. In
theory, this should encourage emergent languages
that are easier for the receiver to learn quickly,
which Li and Bowling show improves composi-
tionality of the resulting languages. To understand
whether this ease of learning is attributed to con-
catenativity, which prior work has typically not
distinguished from compositionality, Figure 9 vi-
sualizes the BPELen of emergent languages with
this pressure in the default Attr-Val setting (i.e., 3
attributes each with 16 values). Interestingly, we
find that the languages resulting from this pressure
are not significantly more concatenative than those
without it shown in Figure 4. Such a result is un-
expected from an intuitive standpoint, but aligns
with the results in 6, which show that concatena-
tivity, by itself, does not have a relationship with
learnability. This motivates future research around
how various pressures may influence fine-grained
properties of emergent languages, and how much
of human language structure can be explained by
the generational (iterated) learning paradigm.
I Additional Natural Language
Comparisons
Figure 10 shows BPE compression computed for
Spanish, Arabic, emergent languages without ar-
ticulation pressure (Em. Base) and emergent lan-
32375

===PDF PAGE 17===
Figure 9: BPELen (concatenativty) of emerged lan-
guages with ease-of-learning pressure at varying symbol
vocabulary sizes|V|.
guages with articulation pressure (Em. Artic.). Fig-
ure 11 shows TopSim ranges for the same experi-
ments. Due to lack of a sufficiently large grammat-
ical feature in our Arabic dataset, we were unable
to compute an Arabic baseline for the 42×6 con-
dition.
J License Information
We provide license information and links for the
following artifacts used in this work:
• EGG Framework: MIT License.
https://github.com/
facebookresearch/EGG
License: https://github.com/
facebookresearch/EGG/blob/main/
LICENSE
• Fred Jehle’s Spanish Verb Dataset: Cre-
ative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.
https://github.com/ghidinelli/
fred-jehle-spanish-verbs
License: https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/
• Arabic-Urdu Conjugation Dataset
https://github.com/haqnawaz99/
Arabic-Urdu-Conjugation-Dataset
32376

===PDF PAGE 18===
Figure 10: BPE compression for natural languages (Spanish and Arabic) and emergent languages across all inflection
conditions. Dotted blue lines: random baselines; dashed blue lines: perfectly concatenative baselines; solid light
blue lines: sublanguages or emergent languages, depending on condition.
Figure 11: TopSim for natural languages (Spanish and Arabic) and emergent languages across all inflection
conditions.
32377